Solitary Confinement
as a Disciplinary Sanction
Focus on Denmark
Discussion Paper
International Conference
3 April 2017
Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction
The use of solitary confinement, defined by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (‘Mandela Rules’) as the practice of ‘the confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or more a day without meaningful human contact’, has been the subject of much local and international concern, and the extents of its use and severe health consequences are widely documented and debated around the world.
International legal standards have long prohibited forms of solitary confinement amounting to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Further protection and regulation are provided by universal soft-law standards, primarily the Mandela Rules, and regional soft-law standards such as the European Prison Rules, as well as by long-standing practice by human rights monitoring bodies, including the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT), the UN Subcommittee for Prevention of Torture (SPT), Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) and jurisprudence by various courts.
The use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure, which is the topic of this conference in Copenhagen, has also attracted attention for decades. More than 25 years ago, the United Nations recognised that efforts targeting the abolition of solitary confinement as a punishment should be undertaken and encouraged. Yet, this continues to occur in a number of countries, causing severe health implications for many inmates, often in violation of the international normative framework.
I United Kingdomm 8,eden 93eden in 2015f Torture enuch as a fight involving weapons. Conversely, e imposition of isolation on women Denmark, the use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure – for both pre-trial detainees and convicted prisoners – is still high and has recently increased further due to tougher regulation of unlawful possession (and use) of mobile phones. In total, its use has more than doubled since 2001 and during the last ten years the numbers have fluctuated between 2430 (2008) and 3044 (2011). Possessing a mobile phone or other communication equipment will now trigger heavier disciplinary sanctions entailing 15 days or longer strafcelle. Moreover, the law (i.e. the Sentence Enforcement Act (in Danish: Straffuldbyrdelsesloven)) continues to permit long time limits up to four weeks for both adults and children in contravention of the international limit of 15 days. Despite the litany of harms inflicted by its use, Danish prison authorities continue to rely on the measure primarily on the grounds of necessity and a lack of alternatives.
This paper provides the background for the discussions pertaining to the four panels:Panel 1: What are the international legal standards regarding solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure?Panel 2: What are the health consequences of solitary confinement? Panel 3: How is solitary confinement used as a disciplinary measure (strafcelle) in Denmark and what are the areas of concern?Panel 4: What are the international experiences using alternatives and reducing the use of solitary confinement?This paper provides the background for the discussions pertaining to the four panels:Panel 1: What are the international legal standards regarding solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure?Panel 2: What are the health consequences of solitary confinement? Panel 3: How is solitary confinement used as a disciplinary measure (strafcelle) in Denmark and what are the areas of concern?Panel 4: What are the international experiences using alternatives and reducing the use of solitary confinement?Key Questions for the Four Panels:
1. What are the international legal standards regarding solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure? How is solitary confinement defined under international law? How is solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure regulated by international law? When does solitary confinement amount to ill-treatment or torture? What has been the impact of the Mandela Rules on the practice of solitary confinement? How does the European system regulate the use of solitary confinement? How is solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure viewed by the SPT and CPT?
2. What are the health consequences of solitary confinement? What are the health consequences of solitary confinement? How to better understand health consequences of solitary confinement? How is such knowledge factored into the imposition of solitary confinement regimes? How is the health of those in solitary confinement monitored? What is the role of health professionals?
3. How is solitary confinement used as a disciplinary measure (strafcelle) in Denmark and what are areas of concern? How does Denmark currently use solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure? How is this measure used in relation to the regulation of mobile phones in prisons? What are the durations involved? How does the Danish NPM monitor solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure? How can inmates complain about these measures?
4. What are the international experiences using alternatives and reducing the use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure? What are the primary areas in which improvements can be realised? What are lessons to be learned from international experiences in reform? What are the factors impeding reform on solitary confinement particularly as a disciplinary measure? How can reform engage with the concerns of prison staff? What are the cost-related arguments advanced against reform?
---END TABLE---
1Panel 1: What are the international legal standards?
Definition of Solitary Confinement
Solitary confinement is now defined under international law for the first time as the:
confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or more a day without meaningful human contact.
Mandela Rules, Rule 44: For the purpose of these rules, solitary confinement shall refer to the confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or more a day without meaningful human contact. Mandela Rules, Rule 44: For the purpose of these rules, solitary confinement shall refer to the confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or more a day without meaningful human contact.
This 22/24 definition is now a universal yardstick that will cover various forms of solitary confinement, including its use for disciplinary purposes.
The Mandela Rules also define prolonged solitary confinement as being ‘solitary confinement for a time period in excess of 15 consecutive days’.
Regulation of Solitary Confinement as a Disciplinary Measure
Prohibition as Torture or Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
No binding instrument of international law directly limits the use of solitary confinement. However, solitary confinement as amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or torture has long been prohibited by the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. This is now repeated in rule 43 (1) of the Mandela Rules.
In the assessment of whether a specific regime or case is a violation of these rules, the CAT, the Human Rights Committee (HRC) and the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) approach the matter in a broadly similar manner by focusing on various factors, such as justification, proportionality, duration, degree, the conditions, impact, and whether procedural safeguards have been provided. Please see DIGNITY’s background paper for further a more detailed discussion.
Prohibition of Prolonged Period of Confinement
Given the risk of irreparable harm arising after the two-week mark, such isolation is prohibited by rule 43 of the Mandela Rules. This should be viewed as ‘a clear point of departure from which solitary confinement no longer constitutes a legitimate tool for State use regardless of the circumstances’, as stated by the former UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Thus, indefinite and prolonged solitary confinement are prohibited. This prohibition should also be seen as applied to ‘frequently renewed measures that amount to prolonged solitary confinement’.  It is CPT practice to require an interruption of several days between such periods.
Prohibition of Isolation of Vulnerable Groups
Rule 45 (2) of the Mandela Rules makes it clear that solitary confinement should be abolished for vulnerable groups including:
children; and,
women (who are pregnant, with infants or breastfeeding).
Mandela Rules, Rule 45 (2): The imposition of solitary confinement should be prohibited in the case of prisoners with mental or physical disabilities when their conditions would be exacerbated by such measures. The prohibition of the use of solitary confinement and similar measures in cases involving women and children, as referred to in other United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (fn: r 67 of Havana Rules and r 22 of Bangkok Rules)  continues to apply. Mandela Rules, Rule 45 (2): The imposition of solitary confinement should be prohibited in the case of prisoners with mental or physical disabilities when their conditions would be exacerbated by such measures. The prohibition of the use of solitary confinement and similar measures in cases involving women and children, as referred to in other United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (fn: r 67 of Havana Rules and r 22 of Bangkok Rules)  continues to apply.
These are simply incorporations of prohibitions already enshrined in the Havana Rules and Bangkok Rules respectively. Specifically with respect to children, the CRC has consistently emphasised that solitary confinement of children be abolished. There has been growing attention, including by the CAT, paid to the plight of women in recognition of distinct problems arising from the isolation of women.
Rule 45 of the Mandela Rules prohibits confinement of prisoners with mental or physical disabilities ‘when their conditions would be exacerbated by such measures’. Relatedly, rule 39 (3) of the Mandela Rules requires prison staff to consider the degree to which the prisoner’s mental illness has influenced their behavior. If it is deemed to be a direct result of the illness, then no sanction shall be imposed.
The CAT has already formed the view in its practice that all solitary confinement for disciplinary purposes for these three relevant groups should be abolished.
Exceptional Use as a Last Resort for as Short as Time a Possible
Mandela Rules, Rule 45 (1): Solitary confinement shall be used only in exceptional cases as a last resort, for as short a time as possible and subject to independent review, and only pursuant to the authorization by a competent authority. Mandela Rules, Rule 45 (1): Solitary confinement shall be used only in exceptional cases as a last resort, for as short a time as possible and subject to independent review, and only pursuant to the authorization by a competent authority. The Mandela Rules and the ECHR’s practice confirm that solitary confinement is ‘one of the most serious measures which can be imposed [within a prison, and that, accordingly] authorities are under an obligation to assess all relevant factors in an inmate's case before placing him in solitary confinement’.
Even a disciplinary sanction of short duration should be assessed against all factors including the principle of necessity and proportionality.
Strict Regulation of Disciplinary Measures
One could ask whether confinement as a disciplinary sanction corresponds with key principles such as proportionality, fairness and due process that should guide all decisions imposing sanctions, and more importantly, whether increasing the duration of confinement significantly correspond with the overall objective that prison administrations always should strive to ensure prison discipline.
The soft-law international regulation of disciplinary measures stretches back for decades and has recently been enlivened due the revision of the Standard Minimum Rules. The two core instruments to directly address this issue are the Mandela Rules, and the Council of Europe’s European Prison Rules (EPR).
Rule 41, Mandela Rules: 1. Any allegation of a disciplinary offence by a prisoner shall be reported promptly to the competent authority, which shall investigate it without undue delay. 2. Prisoners shall be informed, without delay and in a language that they understand, of the nature of the accusations against them and shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of their defence. 3. Prisoners shall be allowed to defend themselves in person, or through legal assistance when the interests of justice so require, particularly in cases involving serious disciplinary charges. If the prisoners do not understand or speak the language used at a disciplinary hearing, they shall be assisted by a competent interpreter free of charge. 4. Prisoners shall have an opportunity to seek judicial review of disciplinary sanctions imposed against them. Rule 41, Mandela Rules: 1. Any allegation of a disciplinary offence by a prisoner shall be reported promptly to the competent authority, which shall investigate it without undue delay. 2. Prisoners shall be informed, without delay and in a language that they understand, of the nature of the accusations against them and shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of their defence. 3. Prisoners shall be allowed to defend themselves in person, or through legal assistance when the interests of justice so require, particularly in cases involving serious disciplinary charges. If the prisoners do not understand or speak the language used at a disciplinary hearing, they shall be assisted by a competent interpreter free of charge. 4. Prisoners shall have an opportunity to seek judicial review of disciplinary sanctions imposed against them.
The Mandela Rules require that:
Rule 37: Solitary confinement shall always be authorized by law.
Rule 39: No prisoner shall be sanctioned except in accordance with the terms of the law or regulation referred to in rule 37 and the principles of fairness and due process.
Rule 39:  A prisoner shall never be sanctioned twice for the same act or offence.
Rule 39 (2): Prison administrations shall ensure proportionality between a disciplinary sanction and the offence for which it is established.
Rule 39 (2): Prison administrations shall keep a proper record of all disciplinary sanctions imposed.
Moreover, the inmate is entitled to:
a written justification for the disciplinary sanction in a language that s/he understands;
the right to appeal and independent judicial review;
information about how to appeal and right to a lawyer;
right to family visits;
access to and adequate provision of medical attention and right to visit by a doctor daily.
Practice of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)
The CPT has worked towards the minimisation of solitary confinement to a considerable degree because of the ‘mental, somatic and social damage’ it can inflict and also because ‘given the opportunity it can provide for the deliberate infliction of ill-treatment’. Its reports and standards have been especially influential. Particular attention has also been paid to the justifications, duration, detention conditions, impact, and procedural rights. This is summarised in its PLANN (proportionality, legality, accountability, necessity, non-discrimination) mnemonic.
Clear and precise legal regulation is deemed important by the CPT standards as follows:
circumstances in which each form of solitary confinement can be imposed;
the persons who may impose it;
the procedures to be followed by those persons;
the right of the prisoner affected to make representations as part of the procedure;
the requirement to give the prisoner the fullest possible reasons for the decision (it being understood that there might in certain cases be reasonable justification for withholding specific details on security-related grounds or in order to protect the interests of third parties);
the frequency and procedure of reviews of the decision; and,
the procedures for appealing against the decision.
* * *
3. Health Consequences (Panel 2)
3.1 Health Impacts of Solitary Confinement
Health studies extensively document, as noted by Peter Scharff and others, the deleterious health impacts of solitary confinement that relate to physical, mental and social consequences.
The degree of harm inflicted on a specific inmate is according to Shalev dictated by a number of factors, including:
individual factors – such as personal background and pre-existing health problems;
environmental factors – i.e., physical conditions and provisions;
contextual factors, including
specific regime – such as time out of cell, degree of human contact etc.;
context of the isolation – such as punishment, own protection, voluntary/non-voluntary, political/criminal; and,
its duration.
Despite variations in individual, environmental and contextual factors, there is consistency in findings on the health effects of solitary confinement.
More importantly, the solitary confinement need not be prolonged (more than 15 days) for any suffering to be inflicted, as noted by Shalev and others. By way of example, according to a Danish research with regard to pre-trial prisoners, ‘acute isolation syndrome’ entailing ‘problems of concentration, restlessness, failure of memory, sleeping problems and impaired sense of time an ability to follow the rhythm of day and night’ became evident after a few days in isolation. This was observed to develop into ‘chronic isolation syndrome’ within weeks as noted by Koch.
Thus, it is a widely-held view that effects ‘can occur after only a few days [and] rise with each additional day spent in such conditions’.
Prison health concerns should be situated within the domain of public health. This connection is made in the European Prison Rules and as noted by the WHO, ‘good prison health is essential to good public health’. Needless to say, this is because what happens in prison does not stay in prison; prisoners are not released from health and behavioural issues as they are released from terms of incarceration. Such links clearly include, but also reach beyond, the harms inflicted by solitary confinement.
3.2Mental Impact
Reported effects with regards to negative impacts on mental health and wellbeing include adjustment disorders and symptoms of anxiety, depression and stress. Studies have found that solitary confinement increased the risk of hospitalization to prison hospital for psychiatric reasons, and that mental health condition improved when prisoners were moved from solitary confinement to non-solitary confinement, indicating that solitary confinement imposes harmful conditions that could have been avoided by abolishing solitary confinement.
More studies show that previously isolated persons have a higher risk of trying to commit suicide than others.
Surveying recent studies, Scharff Smith and Jacobsen conclude that generally the rate of mental illness has increased in Danish prisons. Citing one Kriminalforsorgen study from 2011, they state that approximately one third of all prisoners (those in remand and convicted) had a history of psychiatric treatment or contact with the psychiatric system. Citing another study in Vestre Fængsel, Kriminalforsorgen in 2013 diagnosed 8% with insanity and 83% with psychiatric disorders remand prisoners.
3.3Social Impact
With the deprivation of basic human needs such as social contact, belongingness (including visitation rights, meaningful interaction with other inmates), environmental stimulation (including institutional programming, physical exercise and recreation), individuals can become socially debilitated.
Koch, for instance, has documented the difficulties some Danish prisoners had, due to the anxiety as caused by their isolation, in being around other people upon their release from prison. Haney attributes this, particularly those subjected to prolonged isolation, to the damage and distortion caused to an individual’s social identity and sense of self, which, ‘for some, destroy their ability to function normally in free society’ and the ‘atrophy of important skills and capacities’.
3.4 Factoring Health into Decisions about Disciplinary Sanctions
Prevailing use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure points us to questioning the extent to which health features in decision-making processes. Perhaps, the widespread institutionalisation itself of the practice has come to represent its own justification. Reportedly, such circular thinking renders it easier for an inmate to be put into solitary confinement if that inmate is a gang member or classified as dangerous based on have been subjected to it previously.
Mandela Rules, Rule 39(3): Before imposing disciplinary sanctions, prison administrations shall consider whether and how a prisoner’s mental illness or developmental disability may have contributed to his or her conduct and the commitment of the offence or act underlying the disciplinary charge. Prison administrations shall not sanction any conduct of a prisoner that is considered to be the direct result of his or her mental illness or intellectual disability. Mandela Rules, Rule 39(3): Before imposing disciplinary sanctions, prison administrations shall consider whether and how a prisoner’s mental illness or developmental disability may have contributed to his or her conduct and the commitment of the offence or act underlying the disciplinary charge. Prison administrations shall not sanction any conduct of a prisoner that is considered to be the direct result of his or her mental illness or intellectual disability. Further to this, the mid to longer-term impacts need to be canvassed before solitary confinement is deemed to be fitting.  Accepting its harmful effects on the psyche of its subjects, solitary confinement can predictably also exacerbate recalcitrance and retribution already a feature in many a prison. This would conceivably resonate more so in circumstances where the decision-making process remains opaque: with little or no communication or review rights afforded to the prisoner.
In their study on the United States, Reiter and Blair illustrate ‘the perverse symbiosis of solitary confinement and mental illness’, entailing a ‘vicious cycle’ as mental illness causes misbehaviour that is used to justify solitary confinement, which then causes further deterioration in behaviour and the underlying conditions attracting further discipline. Beyond reasons pertaining to the deinstitutionalisation of inpatient psychiatric care, the failure of prison health professionals to sufficiently ‘track individuals or patterns of behaviour’ is put forward as facilitating this since ‘without documentation of outcomes, the system is permitted to perpetuate itself’. Despite clear differences in criminal justice settings between Denmark and the United States, challenges in disassociating mental illness from criminality is not exclusive to the United States.
Mandela Rules, Rule 46:1. Health-care personnel shall not have any role in the imposition of disciplinary sanctions or other restrictive measures. They shall, however, pay particular attention to the health of prisoners held under any form of involuntary separation, including by visiting such prisoners on a daily basis and providing prompt medical assistance and treatment at the request of such prisoners or prison staff. 2. Health-care personnel shall report to the director, without delay, any adverse effect of disciplinary sanctions or other restrictive measures on the physical or mental health of a prisoner subjected to such sanctions or measures and shall advise the director if they consider it necessary to terminate or alter them for physical or mental health reasons. 3. Health-care personnel shall have the authority to review and recommend changes to the involuntary separation of a prisoner in order to ensure that such separation does not exacerbate the medical condition or mental or physical disability of the prisoner. Mandela Rules, Rule 46:1. Health-care personnel shall not have any role in the imposition of disciplinary sanctions or other restrictive measures. They shall, however, pay particular attention to the health of prisoners held under any form of involuntary separation, including by visiting such prisoners on a daily basis and providing prompt medical assistance and treatment at the request of such prisoners or prison staff. 2. Health-care personnel shall report to the director, without delay, any adverse effect of disciplinary sanctions or other restrictive measures on the physical or mental health of a prisoner subjected to such sanctions or measures and shall advise the director if they consider it necessary to terminate or alter them for physical or mental health reasons. 3. Health-care personnel shall have the authority to review and recommend changes to the involuntary separation of a prisoner in order to ensure that such separation does not exacerbate the medical condition or mental or physical disability of the prisoner.
In addition, one may ask the question whether the harms associated with the punishment element is considered when decisions about imposing solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure is taken.
3.5 Monitoring of Disciplinary Sanctions by Health Professionals
Monitoring by a qualified health professional of the health of those inmates who are placed in solitary confinement as a result of a disciplinary decision is also paramount. Not all prisoners react to the same conditions in the same way, especially if an inmate has pre-existing, or a predisposition, to mental health issues.
The EPR require that prisoners in solitary confinement to be monitored daily by a medical practitioner, who is then to report to the prison director if the prisoner’s health is being put seriously at risk (Rules 43.2 and 43.3).
The Mandela Rules similarly impose strict requirements about monitoring by health professionals and underline that the health professionals should advise the staff “if necessary to terminate or alter them (these measures) for physical or mental health reasons”.
Health professionals, primarily driven by the ethos of preserving health, are very much faced with a difficult ethical quandary when working in a system which has punishment, dimensions of which can constitute ill-treatment, at its heart. Conflicted loyalties, between the inmate/patient and the institution, conceivably arise where it is incumbent on the health professional to report any such ill-treatment but who must also continue to work with the responsible staff. In one Danish study, it was shown that prison counsellors administering prison-based drug treatment were themselves adapting to and recommending the use of isolation as a means to detoxification. In other research, a Norwegian ethnographical study on Tromsø Prison, Marta Rue noted that prison doctors monitoring prisoners in solitary confinement were depicted as being conflict-averse, positioning themselves as pragmatic and cooperative instead of holding their ground or being critical or reform-minded.
* * *
3Panel 3: How is solitary confinement used as a disciplinary measure (strafcelle) in Denmark and what are the areas of concern?
In Denmark, the use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure remains prevalent and has long attracted the ire of the international community. As recently as 2016, the CAT and the HRC harshly criticised the Danish practice. The CAT explicitly recommended that Denmark abolish the use of solitary confinement of minors and its use as a disciplinary measure. The HRC called for Denmark to align its practice according to international standards.
The strafcelle is the most severe disciplinary measure available in Danish prisons, with the less restrictive methods including warnings and fines. Its use pursuant to the Sentence Enforcement Act has virtually doubled from 2001 to 2016, as mentioned. The vast majority of cases relate to men (2918 out of the estimated 2995 cases in 2016). Moreover, the mentioned legislative amendment regarding unlawful use of mobile phones has entailed a significant increase in the use of longer punishment in excess of 15 days. There is, unfortunately, no general statistic regarding the duration of such isolation.
In 2004, the Danish government introduced a new zero-tolerance policy on drug-related crimes and, in this regard, signalled a heavy-handed use of the disciplinary cell. This policy agenda is reflected in the statistics. More recently, the Danish Government has introduced tougher regulation of unlawful possession (and use) of mobile phones.
Some prisons have separate sections for isolation cells. The physical conditions of the isolation cell (under here observation cell and security cell) varies between the different institutions (such as size, state of repair, lightning etc.).
Pursuant to § 68 of the Sentence Enforcement Act, it is to be used as disciplinary measure when prisoners breach the internal prison rules such as smuggling, committing or threatening violence, or possessing alcohol, drugs, weapons, mobile phones etc.
According to § 70 of the Act, a prisoner can be placed in a disciplinary cell for a maximum of four weeks.
Pursuant to the powers conferred to the Minister of Justice under § 70 (3) of the Act, the Minister has adopted a regulation of the use of disciplinary cell in a regulation (Bekendtgørelse om udståelse af strafcelle, anvendelse af forhørscelle og behandlingen af disciplinærsager (disciplinærstrafbekendtgørelsen). This, in detail, describes the use, administration and complaint procedure. In addition, the Minister of Justice has published a guidance (‘Vejledning om behandlingen af sager om disciplinærstraf, konfiskation og modregning af erstatningsbeløb (disciplinærstrafvejledningen)’) which includes information on how to decide on using the disciplinary cell, legal obligations and safeguards for the prisoner.
Pursuant to § 70 (1) of the Sentence Enforcement Act, the prison staff have to take into account the nature and extent of the violation in order to use the disciplinary cell. In doing so, the prison staff conduct a specific assessment as bound by the principle of proportionality, in harmony with international standards. In daily practice, when prisoners violate internal prison rules, disciplinary measures are used in accordance to a form of normal reactions (a type of sentencing matrix). This form is developed centrally by Kriminalforsorgen and applies to uniform prison facilities. As pointed out by experts, this practice can be useful to secure a consistent use of disciplinary measures such as solitary confinement. However, it can also be a pitfall as the form sometimes is used uncritically, as an answer book of sorts. This unduly eliminates the need for the specific assessment and the proportionality test, informed by the circumstances particular to the situation, by the appropriate prison staff.
As shown in table 3, in 2015, the most commonly used justification for the use of disciplinary cell was the improper disposal of objects and money, consisting of 44,9 % of all placements.
Table 3, Justifications for the disciplinary cell in 2015
 | %
Refused to give urine sample | 4,8
Occupation refusal | 1,3
Smuggling / possession / consumption of alcohol or drugs | 8,1
Failed to follow staff instructions | 5,5
Escape attempts | 1,2
Improper disposal of objects and money | 44,9
Avoidance / absence from leave | 0,5
Other misuse of leave | 1,6
Other criminal offences | 17,7
Violation of rules set by the institution leader | 14,4
Total % | 100
---END TABLE---
Statistical evidence on the time durations of placements in disciplinary cells is not published by Kriminalforsorgen.
Decisions on the use of disciplinary cells, which pursuant to the Sentence Enforcement Act are made by the local institutions, can be complained to Direktoratet for Kriminalforsorgen. Direktoratet’s decisions are final and cannot be brought before another administrative authority on appeal. A complaint to Kriminalforsorgen has no suspensory effect, unless Direktoratet so decides. Decisions on the use of disciplinary cells, with the sole exception of those measures entailing a duration of more than seven days, cannot in general be appealed to the court system.
Lawyers who work with prisoners commonly report that only a small number of the overall use of the disciplinary cell is complained to Direktoratet, and that even a smaller number of complaints are being brought before the judicial system on appeal.
In 2012, the Parliamentary Ombudsman (Danish: Folketingets Ombudsmand), in cooperation with DIGNITY and the Danish Institute for Human Rights, began to conduct inspections where people are deprived of their liberty. Recognising the particular concerns arising from the use of solitary confinement, the Ombudsman has long paid special attention to those in strafcelle when conducting its visits.
4 Panel 4: What are the international experiences using alternatives and reducing the use of solitary confinement?
Introduction
Discipline within conventional prison settings centres on retribution and deterrence, deeming rehabilitation a secondary consideration, if at all. Environments which are oppressive and violent should call us to question the degree to which prisoners should be expected to follow prison discipline. The primacy of security concerns also mean that expectations of reform need be approached with some caution. The experiences below illustrate that change is feasible in the following areas:
Legislative Change: The most direct and effective avenue is legislative change. Like Norway and Sweden, the most meaningful and concrete reform would be to abolish the measure outright in domestic legislation.
Favourable Regulation: Entry, Conditions and Exit: Another means of progressive reform of the use of solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure would be to restrict entry criteria, improve conditions of confinement, and strengthen review mechanisms. For further information, please refer to DIGNITY’s background paper.
Prison Culture: As prison officer culture is ‘central to the reproduction of the prison as a place of punishment and pain’, it must be incorporated into any discussion on penal reform. That is, profound cultural impediments may also encumber any change in procedure. One must also be mindful, however, that prison authorities act on political directives or other less formal cues such as the emanating rhetoric on law and order. Crewe, Bennett and Wahidin argue that there is an explanatory deficiency in how and why cultures differ between institutions or, ‘the dynamics by which they are sustained’. Leibling has argued that the prison staff culture cannot said to be homogenous, observing that prison staff operate on suspicion and machismo on the one hand and diplomacy, decisiveness and flexibility on the other. A range of stakeholders, primarily prison administrators and guards, must also be factored in to the equation. Legitimate considerations of prison security and order would expectedly feature prominently in the mind of a decision maker. Legal or theoretical knowledge is no substitute for operational expertise of a prison’s dynamics. It is important that they are given their due weight. Gauging the need for training on improving prisoner-prison staff relationships and practical implications of international law standards are key.
These prescriptions are seemingly derived from the concept of ‘dynamic security’, a proactive approach which values positive prisoner-staff relationships to better enable staff to anticipate and address security threats early on. Both the European Prison Rules (rule 51) and the Mandela Rules (rule 76) incorporate dynamic security into their respective understandings of prisoner management.
Deterrence: Effectiveness of the measure is another aspect of its critique. Even with other factors controlled, a recent study of male inmates in Oregon concluded that 'disciplinary segregation [double-celled isolation] was not a significant predictor of subsequent institutional misconduct'. Lucas and Jones provide an overview of a number of similar studies that have reached similar conclusions with respect to various uses of solitary confinement.
Cost–Related Arguments: Some have argued that it is cheaper to use solitary confinement than other less-restrictive means. However, when calculated, financial costs associated with relying on solitary confinement, which engages comparatively more prison resources to perform the same functions such as monitoring, delivering basic needs such as food, hygiene and recreation, undermine such reasoning. Moreover, as a secondary argument, according to Bennion, as cost efficiency arguments do not override the provision of other basic human needs like food, neither should they override another such need namely meaningful human contact.
Reform of Pre-trial Solitary Confinement in Denmark
Historically, Denmark’s use of solitary confinement during criminal investigation pursuant to the Administration of Justice Act, (Danish: Retsplejeloven) was excessive in number and duration. Smith and Koch pointed out that until the late 1970s more than 40% of all pre-trial detainees were placed in such solitary confinement. As a consequence of extensive research and documentation (see below), as well as pressure from organisations, including Amnesty International and DIGNITY, and international committees and various civil society organisations, this practice was challenged and since improved.
The reform began when the Ministry of Justice, in late 1982, - as a result of parliamentary discussions - requested that the Strafferetsplejeudvalget (Criminal Justice Committee) provide its opinion on the use of solitary confinement in Denmark. When providing its opinion, the Committee stated that it had not fully conducted the necessary studies due to time constraints. In a further legislative review of the pertinent law in 1989, the Ministry of Justice again requested an opinion and the Committee then considered it necessary to conduct an extensive comprehensive psychiatric and psychological study to inform this legislative process. This lead to the Copenhagen Study on Solitary Confinement (Danish: Isolationsundersøgelsen), published in two phases being in 1994 and 1997, which was instrumental in documenting the health consequences locally. Consisting of seven studies, Danish psychiatrists Andersen, Sestoft and Lillebæk, inter alia, related the use of pre-trial solitary confinement with negative psychiatric effects including significantly higher incidence of psychiatric morbidity and higher likelihood of being admitted to the prison hospital for a psychiatric reason when compared with non-isolated detainees. The authors ultimately recommended that pre-trial solitary confinement be abolished.
Moreover, a number of legislative changes, which centred around better complaint and oversight mechanisms, decreased time limits and a broader change in public and policy mentality, incrementally reduced the use of pre-trial solitary confinement. These included:
judicial oversight was introduced in 1978, which required an imposition of pre-trial solitary confinement to be determined by a judge;
for the first time, in 1984, a maximum time limit of eight weeks was introduced for all prisoners including children, unless the charges concerned an offence that could lead to a sentence for six years or more;
in 2000, a new maximum limit, of four weeks, was introduced, unless the charges concerned an offence that could at least lead to four years in prison and in addition there was substantial grounds for the interest of the police investigation;
the latest changes happened in 2006 after a major public debate after which further time limits were introduced.
These changes in legislation were very successful in curbing the use of solitary confinement. Moreover, an oversight mechanism, which was introduced in the form of mandatory yearly reporting to the Ministry of Justice by the Director of Public Prosecution, entailed transparency and better documentation.
There has been a significant decrease in the use of solitary confinement in pre-trial detention. In 2001, 9,5% of all pre-trial detainees were held in isolation and, in 2015, this number dropped to only 0,7% of overall (being a total of 32 placements). This is a drop of more than 94% from 2001.
The average duration of solitary confinement in 2015 was 19 days. In 2014, three prisoners were placed in isolation between 15 and 28 days, one prisoner was placed in isolation between 29 and 42 days and six were placed between 43 and 56 days. Altogether 10 prisoners were placed in prolonged solitary confinement. The CAT and HRC assessing this as prolonged and in breach of international standards, strongly recommended that time limits be further decreased.
The main arguments in affecting these changes, as just outlined, were based on raising awareness of the harm inflicted by solitary confinement, the strengthening of judicial review mechanisms coupled with the imperative that it needed to be seen and used as a method of last resort. This development should be seen as an illustration on how rigid conceptions of necessity can be challenged and, ultimately, dismantled.
International Experiences in Reforms and Alternatives
There are significant challenges in comparing the use of solitary confinement across different jurisdictions. Prison conditions, degrees of isolation, terminology and regulatory frameworks are not standardised. With that in mind, reforms in jurisdictions comparable to Denmark show that more innovative and effective alternatives, though not without their own shortcomings, to solitary confinement exist. Focal points are found in Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Despite the existence of strong historical work tracing the relevant developments, there is no comprehensive comparative research available on reforms and alternatives.
Norway: Norway’s experience, where complete solitary punishment as a disciplinary measure was abolished with the enactment of the Execution of Sentences Act in 2001, is of some instruction here. The reform was also a product of domestic and international pressure.
Exceptions in the regulatory framework are made for short-term punitive use entailing partial isolation for up to 24 hours. Partial or complete preventive solitary confinement (i.e. exclusion) can still be used if necessary to ‘maintain peace, order and security’, and to prevent negatively influencing prison environment, criminal acts or material damage.
Human rights advocates have argued that the increased use of preventive solitary confinement coupled with its vague and discretionary nature in Norway indicates a development of a practice where prevention is being used to circumvent the limitations on disciplinary measures. .
Sweden: Similarly, Sweden abolished the solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure in 1976. The reforms were driven by the recognition of the harms resulting from isolation. Notably, the Parliamentary Committee tasked with the investigation also considered and dismissed the claims that the measure was indispensable as a last resort. Furthermore, the Parliamentary Committee pointed out that prisons as a matter of course significantly isolate prisoners and that further isolation, when prolonged, would raise difficulties for the isolated prisoner, as a result of denial of prison programs such as job training, in re-adjusting back to society.
The CPT noted that although solitary confinement was purportedly used on administrative grounds as found under the relevant law, it was perceived by most inmates interviewed as punitive.
United Kingdom: The United Kingdom have sought reforms in limiting its use of solitary confinement. In the last couple of years particularly, its NPM has paid close attention to its causes and prevalence. This process has culminated in the development of new guidelines released in January 2017 where the UK NPM, amongst other things, requires that: evidence of the consideration of alternatives be provided by decision-makers; isolation not occur due to a shortage of staff or facility design; decisions should be authorised and recorded by senior staff; basic amenities and routines should be provided and not be denied as a matter of policy; and that staff should play a positive and meaningful role with prisoners.
Grendon: Pitted against the supermax, a system of incarceration comprehensively informed by a psycho-therapeutic approach is presented by HMP Grendon in England. Grendon, the only therapeutic community prison in England, has successfully abolished isolation within its confines and has only resorted to transferring its inmates to isolation cells in nearby prisons on the rare occasion. It is all the more impressive as its prisoner population is comparable to that of a supermax, with a vast majority of serving indeterminate sentences, with a history, prior to being transferred to Grendon, of ‘significantly higher level of formal disciplinary punishments for disciplinary infractions’. Composed of five distinct communities, each has its ‘dedicated staff group including prison officers, a therapy manager who has psychotherapeutic training, a psychologist and facilitators with a range of professional and clinical backgrounds.’ Instances of poor behaviour are effectively addressed by the prisoner group. Significant outcomes have been documented ‘including reduced levels of violence and self-harm, improved psychological well-being and improved quality of life for prisoners and staff’.
United States of America: although the scale of solitary confinement remains a main feature of the American penitentiary landscape (with estimates from 25,000, counting only supermax, to 80,000, counting segregated housing as well), successful reforms have been realised in some states. Standards and alternatives have been developed and advocated for by non-governmental organisations as well as governmental agencies. The Marshall Project has compiled the changes in an interactive graphic found on its website.
Colorado: has reduced its administratively segregated population from 7.7% of its overall population in 2011 to 1.1% in 2014 through developing specific facilities for the treatment of inmates with mental illnesses. It has also adopted policies prohibiting the imposition of isolation on women and children.
Maine: according to the ACLU, the reforms there have been significant with: ‘the number of prisoners in solitary confinement has been cut in half; the duration of stays in Maine’s solitary units is generally now measured in days rather than weeks or months; and the treatment of prisoners in these units includes substantially more meaningful human interaction and more opportunity for rehabilitation.’ In terms of disciplinary solitary confinement, its imposition was limited to cases involving an ‘extremely serious offence such as a fight involving weapons’ where either of the following was present 1) the prisoner constitutes an escape risk in less restrictive status; 2) the prisoner poses a threat to the safety of others in less restrictive status; 3) the prisoner poses a threat to his/her own safety in less restrictive status; or 4) there may be a threat to the prisoner’s safety in a less restrictive status.’ Conversely, alternatives were broadened to include: ‘confining the prisoner to his own cell; limiting contact visits; restricting the visitors allowed to immediate family; loss of work opportunities’.
New York: proposed changes to primarily reduce, through less restrictive means, the state’s overreliance on extreme forms of solitary confinement were instigated by litigation. The draft bill Humane Alternatives to Long-Term (HALT) Solitary Confinement Act proposes to ensure that those separated from the general population be placed in ‘a rehabilitative and therapeutic unit aimed at providing additional programs, therapy, and support to address underlying needs and causes of behavior, with 6 hours per day of out-of-cell programming plus one hour of out-of-cell recreation’ and that 'no person may be held in isolated confinement more than 15 consecutive days nor 20 days total in any 60 day period. At these limits, a person must be released or diverted to the alternative RRU with more out-of-cell time, programs, and therapy.’
* * *
7.Notes
