United Nations
General Assembly

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
Distr.: General 6 February 2026
Original: English

Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fifty-second session Geneva, 4-15 May 2026
Denmark
Compilation of information prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
I. Background
1. The present report was prepared pursuant to Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 16/21, taking into consideration the outcome of the previous review.1 It is a compilation of information contained in relevant United Nations documents, presented in a summarized manner owing to word-limit constraints.
II. Scope of international obligations and cooperation with human rights mechanisms
2. In 2023, the Committee against Torture welcomed the ratification by Denmark of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in 2022.2 In 2021, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination encouraged Denmark to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. 3 The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) noted that Denmark was not a party to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.4 3. Denmark made annual voluntary contributions to support the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights during the reporting period.5
III. National human rights framework
Institutional infrastructure and policy measures 4. In 2025, the Human Rights Committee asked Denmark, with regard to the Danish Institute for Human Rights, to provide information on measures taken, including: (a) amending the Act on the Danish Institute for Human Rights to establish an independent procedure for removal of board members; (b) ensuring legal protection for board and staff against liability for actions undertaken in their official capacity; and (c) guaranteeing adequate funding to fulfil its mandate.6
GE.26-00776 (E) 060226 060226

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
IV. Promotion and protection of human rights
A. Implementation of international human rights obligations, taking into account applicable international humanitarian law
1. Equality and non-discrimination
5. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern about the large gap between officially registered cases of racial discrimination and the much larger number of cases of racial discrimination indicated in surveys among people with an ethnic minority background. It recommended that Denmark conduct research on the reasons for that discrepancy.7
6. The same Committee expressed concern that the terms "Western" and "non-Western" used in legislation and policies could lead to stigmatization. It recommended that Denmark discontinue the use of those terms and use alternatives that did not convey a distinction that could result in stigmatization, marginalization or indirect discrimination against any group of people.8
7. The same Committee noted with concern that the laws previously known as the "Ghetto Package" had a discriminatory impact on ethnic minorities. It was also concerned that, under those laws, although areas classified as "vulnerable" had already met at least two out of four detailed socioeconomic criteria, the additional criterion of having at least 50 per cent of "non-Western" residents led to such vulnerable areas being classified as "parallel societies" and to the application of more restrictive rules, thus adding a discriminatory ethnic and racial element to those laws, which could result in stigmatization in various areas of life, such as employment, housing and access to services. The Committee recommended that Denmark: (a) refrain from using the percentage of immigrants and their descendants from "non-Western" countries in a particular area as a basis for applying stricter laws; and (b) repeal discriminatory provisions.9
8. The same Committee raised concerns about the underreporting of racist hate crimes and hate speech, the lack of comprehensive data collection in that regard and gaps between the number of hate crimes registered by police, the number of prosecutions and the number of convictions. It recommended that Denmark remove barriers to reporting racist hate crimes and hate speech incidents, ensure effective investigation and prosecution, establish a comprehensive disaggregated data-collection system and continue dialogue with affected communities.10
9. The same Committee expressed concern about the lack of a clear prohibition of racial profiling and of operational guidelines to combat racial profiling. It recommended that Denmark define and prohibit racial profiling in legislation, put in place a mechanism to obtain statistical data with regard to ethnic profiling, monitor the number of complaints of ethnic profiling against the police and other law enforcement agencies and intensify efforts to include persons with a non-Danish ethnic background in front-line posts as police officers.11
10. The same Committee noted the lack of data on the ethnicity of persons residing in Denmark. It reiterated its recommendation that Denmark revise its data-collection processes to ensure that it collected data on ethnicity.12
11. In 2024, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was concerned about the lack of funding and resources of the Board of Equal Treatment, resulting in long processing times for settling complaints about discrimination on the grounds of disability. It recommended that Denmark ensure sufficient resources to reduce the time required to process complaints.13
2. Right to life, liberty and security of person, and freedom from torture
12. The Committee against Torture was concerned that torture was not criminalized as a distinct offence in the Danish Penal Code, the Military Criminal Code or the Greenlandic or Faroese criminal law. It recommended that Denmark make torture a punishable offence per

2

GE.26-00776

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
se and that the definition fully encompass the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.14
13. While acknowledging that material conditions in prisons in Denmark were generally of a high quality, the Committee against Torture expressed concern about conditions in remand detention being of an inferior quality compared to prisons. It also raised concern about insufficient staffing and detention facilities operating near or above maximum capacity in places of deprivation of liberty. The Committee recommended that Denmark improve conditions in all places of deprivation of liberty and alleviate overcrowding through non-custodial measures and adequate staffing.15
14. The same Committee was concerned about a high proportion of remand detention and an increase in the duration of pretrial detention, with low usage of alternatives to detention. It recommended that Denmark adequately regulate the conditions and rights of prisoners in remand detention and promote the use of non-custodial measures.16
15. The same Committee noted that a high proportion of remand prisoners were subject to court restrictions on contact with the outside world. It recommended that Denmark ensure that any such restrictions were necessary and proportionate.17
16. The same Committee expressed concern that sufficient legal safeguards, including timely access to legal representation and adequate interpretation and translation, were not always guaranteed from the outset of detention. It recommended that Denmark ensure that all fundamental legal safeguards were guaranteed in law and in practice from the outset of detention.18 It also recommended that Denmark provide prisoners with adequate information on their rights.19
17. The same Committee was concerned about systematic strip searches in certain detention facilities without an individual evaluation of necessity, and insufficient access to medical care in remand centres, return and deportation centres and prisons. It recommended that Denmark limit the practice of strip-searching persons deprived of their liberty to exceptional cases and allocate sufficient resources to provide prisoners and detainees with adequate healthcare.20
18. The same Committee noted efforts to reduce the use of solitary confinement, but remained concerned that solitary confinement could last up to four weeks and was still allowed for juveniles, and that voluntary isolation lacked safeguards against psychological harm. It recommended that Denmark: (a) limit solitary confinement to exceptional cases as a last resort, for as short a time as possible, not exceeding 15 days; (b) end its use for children; and (c) adopt rules and psychological support for inmates who were voluntarily excluded from association.21
19. The same Committee expressed concern about restrictive regimes amounting to de facto solitary confinement in pretrial detention and recommended that Denmark end such confinement of prisoners on remand.22
20. The same Committee was concerned over plans to extraterritorially incarcerate third-country nationals awaiting deportation by leasing a prison facility outside the territory of Denmark. It recommended that Denmark refrain from leasing detention facilities outside its territory, and ensure that persons deprived of their liberty were not discriminated against on the basis of their nationality and that no undue or discriminatory restrictions were placed on their right to maintain family ties while in prison.23
3. Administration of justice, including impunity, and the rule of law
21. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was concerned about barriers to access to justice for persons with disabilities, across Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland, including the insufficient provision of procedural accommodation in judicial and administrative proceedings and limited training within the administrative and judicial system about the rights of persons with disabilities. It recommended that Denmark develop a strategy to ensure effective access to justice for persons with disabilities, including measures to provide free procedural accommodation for persons with disabilities and to deliver appropriate training to administrative and judicial staff.24

GE.26-00776

3

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
22. The Compliance Committee of the Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (Aarhus Convention) found no violations of the Aarhus Convention by Denmark in an individual communication processed during the period under review.25
4. Fundamental freedoms
23. UNESCO noted that defamation was a criminal offence under Danish law and recommended that Denmark decriminalize defamation and place it within civil defamation legislation that was in accordance with international standards.26
24. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to provide information on the compatibility with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of the amendment to section 110 (e) of the Penal Code, which criminalized the "improper treatment of objects with significant religious significance", and on concerns about the vagueness of the terms and potential chilling effects on legitimate expression.27
25. UNESCO encouraged Denmark to establish a transparency and accountability mechanism in the governance of digital platforms to ensure human rights were upheld and the risks associated with the spread of harmful content online were mitigated.28
26. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to respond to reports that participants in peaceful protests, including demonstrations related to climate change, had been subjected to arbitrary arrest and fines.29
27. The same Committee asked Denmark to indicate the steps taken to ensure a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders, including those supporting minorities, and to ensure that those promoting and defending migrants' rights and the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons were not subjected to smear campaigns aimed at inhibiting their work.30
5. Right to marriage and family life
28. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recommended that Denmark: (a) remove mandatory waiting periods for family reunification for all beneficiaries of international protection; 31 (b) guarantee family reunification for children aged 15-18; and (c) interpret dependency of family members of beneficiaries of international protection in a flexible and inclusive manner.32
29. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to indicate the steps taken to amend the Aliens Act with a view to reducing restrictions on family reunification for persons under temporary protection status.33
6. Prohibition of all forms of slavery, including trafficking in persons
30. The Committee against Torture welcomed the adoption by Denmark of a National Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings 2022-2025. However, it was concerned about the low number of investigations and convictions for trafficking in human beings and the limited recovery and reflection period for victims. It recommended that Denmark thoroughly investigate, prosecute and appropriately sanction trafficking in human beings, and ensure victims' access to full redress, including adequate compensation, rehabilitation and support, such as the provision of temporary residence permits of an adequate duration for victims, irrespective of their willingness to cooperate with the authorities.34
31. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women noted: (a) the lack of comprehensive data on women and girls victim of trafficking, particularly in Greenland and the Faroe Islands; (b) the low number of criminal prosecutions; (c) the recruitment of victims through the Internet; and (d) the limited resources of the Copenhagen Police anti-trafficking unit. It recommended that Denmark: (a) systematically collect disaggregated data; (b) adopt a human rights-based approach to combat trafficking; (c) prioritize prevention; (d) revise immigration policies to avoid deterring reporting crimes of trafficking; and (e) raise awareness about the recruitment of victims through the Internet.35

4

GE.26-00776

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
7. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work
32. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities welcomed the various initiatives and amendments to legislation to reduce discrimination and prejudice that prevented access for persons with disabilities to the labour market. However, it noted that the employment rate of persons with disabilities was lower than that of others and recommended that Denmark adopt a long-term employment strategy to promote full inclusion of persons with disabilities in the open labour market, including through targeted action plans, awareness-raising, training and disability-responsive support.36
8. Right to education
33. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was concerned that segregated schooling had increased and that barriers to inclusive education had resulted in school refusal and the involuntary absence of children with disabilities. It recommended: (a) including children with disabilities in quality inclusive education; (b) removing barriers to transition from special to quality inclusive education; (c) improving teacher qualifications in inclusive education methodologies and training tools; and (d) providing support, including with regard to sign language.37
9. Development and the environment
34. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to describe efforts to prevent and mitigate the effects of climate change and environmental degradation, including rising sea levels and glacier and coastal erosion, on the right to life, particularly in Greenland and the Faroe Islands.38
B. Rights of specific persons or groups
1. Women
35. The Committee against Torture took note of the measures taken by Denmark to combat gender-based violence and welcomed the adoption of the National Action Plan to Combat Intimate Partner Violence and Intimate Partner Killings 2023-2026. However, it noted that victims of intimate partner violence might be reluctant to leave situations of abuse if residence permits were linked to family reunification. It recommended that Denmark ensure the investigation and prosecution of all acts of gender-based violence, including domestic violence, ensure redress and access to shelters and support for victims, and prevent victims from being forced to remain in abusive situations owing to their migration status.39
36. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women commended Denmark for such measures as the adoption of specific provisions on psychological violence, a hotline for victims of sexual violence, and new shelters and support services. However, it noted with concern the rise in gender-based violence against women, high incidences of sexual violence against women with disabilities and the reported high prevalence of sexual harassment in the workplace and the education system. It recommended that Denmark strengthen laws and policies on domestic violence, provide sufficient shelters, address the high rate of sexual violence against women with disabilities and ensure effective remedies for sexual harassment in the workplace and the education system.40
2. Children
37. The Committee against Torture was concerned that, in some cases, children in social care were placed in secure residential facilities along with children serving custodial sentences. It recommended that Denmark ensure that children were accommodated in facilities suited to their needs and that placement in closed facilities was exceptional, a last resort, necessary and proportionate, and for as short a period as possible.41
3. Persons with disabilities
38. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was concerned that legislation allowed, under certain preconditions, for the detention and compulsory treatment

GE.26-00776

5

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
of persons with intellectual and/or psychosocial disabilities who resisted treatment and were deemed incapable of giving informed consent. It recommended that Denmark repeal all laws and abolish all practices that allowed for the deprivation of liberty on the basis of impairment and forced treatment, including mental health laws and institutionalization policies.42
39. The same Committee expressed concern about coercion, forced treatment and restrictive practices, including physical and chemical restraints against children and adults with disabilities in social care and psychiatric institutions, and insufficient oversight mechanisms and implementation of recommendations from existing oversight mechanisms. It recommended that Denmark prohibit the use of coercion, forced treatment and restrictive practices against children and adults with disabilities who were still in places of detention and social care and psychiatric institutions, and strengthen oversight mechanisms and implementation.43
40. The same Committee noted with concern the prevalence of violence against children and adults with disabilities in institutions, including gender-based and sexual violence against women and girls, and the lack of accessible shelters. It recommended that Denmark further develop and implement comprehensive and effective action plans on prevention and response to violence against children and adults with disabilities in institutions.44
41. The same Committee was concerned that legal frameworks allowed for sterilization, contraception and abortion in the case of women and girls with disabilities under guardianship without their personal consent. It recommended that Denmark prohibit such practices in the case of women and girls with disabilities without their free and informed personal consent.45
42. The same Committee noted with concern the lack of a comprehensive, multisectoral strategy on deinstitutionalization concerning all persons with disabilities and about measures aiming towards increased institutionalization of persons with disabilities. It recommended that Denmark adopt multisectoral deinstitutionalization strategies.46
43. The same Committee also noted insufficient measures taken to repeal restrictions on legal capacity on the basis of actual or perceived impairment under the Guardianship Act and the lack of measures to repeal substituted decision-making systems and enact supported decision-making systems. It recommended that Denmark amend the Guardianship Act to guarantee full legal capacity and replace substituted decision-making systems with supported decision-making systems that respected the will and preference of persons with disabilities in all areas of life.47
44. The same Committee noted with concern that the Act on Prohibition of Discrimination on Grounds of Disability did not impose an obligation to provide reasonable accommodation or to ensure accessibility, and that a duty of reasonable accommodation had been introduced only in day care and in primary schools. It recommended that Denmark amend the Act on Prohibition of Discrimination on Grounds of Disability to recognize denial of reasonable accommodation as a form of discrimination, introduce an obligation to provide reasonable accommodation and ensure accessibility in all aspects of life.48
4. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons
45. The Committee against Torture expressed concern about reports of non-consensual, irreversible surgeries performed on intersex children, and that intersex adults in need of gender-affirming care who disagreed with their assigned gender at birth experienced discrimination in treatment when compared with intersex persons who accessed medical care based on their originally assigned gender. The Committee recommended that Denmark: (a) enforce its prohibition of irreversible surgical operations on intersex children for cosmetic reasons; (b) provide impartial counselling to parents; (c) ensure remedies for harm caused; and (d) guarantee equal specialized care for all intersex persons, regardless of their conformity with the gender they were assigned at birth.49

6

GE.26-00776

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
5. Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
46. UNHCR recommended that Denmark ensure that public discourse distinguished refugees from migrants clearly, and take steps to counter rhetoric that fostered discrimination and exclusion or undermined integration.50
47. The Committee against Torture was concerned about legislation enabling the externalization of the asylum policy of Denmark, and about plans to process asylum claims in a third country. The Committee recommended that Denmark revisit legislation and plans for such externalization. 51 UNHCR recommended that Denmark: (a) ensure that any arrangements for transfer of asylum-seekers to third countries were in line with international law; (b) ensure the sustainability of the transfer and the dignity of asylum-seekers in the receiving country; and (c) obtain guarantees of access to a fair and efficient asylum procedure.52
48. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to indicate the steps taken to amend the Aliens Act, with a view to limiting the detention of migrants and asylum-seekers to the shortest possible period, ensuring periodic review and providing non-custodial measures.53
49. The Committee against Torture was concerned about the alleged reliance by Denmark on diplomatic assurances to justify the return of asylum-seekers to countries where there could be substantial grounds for believing that such persons would be in danger of being subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, or risk subsequent chain refoulement. It recommended that Denmark refrain from seeking and accepting diplomatic assurances, in the context of both extradition and deportation, from States where there were grounds for believing that persons would be at risk of torture or ill-treatment upon return, or where there were grounds to believe that chain refoulement could occur to a State where there were such grounds.54
50. The same Committee was concerned about the "tolerated stay" regime, under which persons must reside in a return centre and could not work. It recommended that Denmark review the regime to ensure individuals' access to work and freedom to choose their residence.55
51. The same Committee noted the generally carceral format of administrative detention for deportation. It recommended that detention be used only as a last resort, where strictly necessary and proportionate, and for as short a time as possible. It also recommended that Denmark expand non-custodial measures and ensure that children and families with children were not detained solely for their immigration status. It further recommended that persons in immigration detention who had not been criminally convicted be detained separately to persons with criminal histories.56 In the context of follow-up to concluding observations, while noting information provided by Denmark that children would not be detained for the purpose of return, the Committee remained concerned that such an option continued to exist in law.57
52. The same Committee raised concern regarding regular mandatory review of asylum status linked to temporariness and its detrimental effects on the mental health of refugees. It recommended that Denmark ensure that reviews were based on new information indicating a fundamental, stable and durable change in the conditions in countries of origin.58 UNHCR recommended that Denmark discontinue regular mandatory review of continued international protection needs upon extension of residence permits and ensure that reviewing or ending protection was limited to situations where the criteria and standards for that as established in the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees were clearly present, and that any application of cessation, withdrawal or non-renewal of international protection status was subject to strict safeguards and rigorous scrutiny.59
6. Stateless persons
53. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and UNHCR welcomed the measures taken by Denmark to prevent and reduce statelessness. However, they noted that children born stateless in Denmark did not automatically acquire nationality at birth. They recommended that Denmark ensure, by law, that children born in the country were automatically granted Danish citizenship if they would otherwise be stateless.60

GE.26-00776

7

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
C. Specific regions or territories
54. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women recommended that Denmark extend the territorial application of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure to Greenland and the Faroe Islands.61
55. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to provide information on efforts to establish a national human rights institution in the Faroe Islands that conformed to the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles).62 The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women recommended that Denmark establish, in the Faroe Islands, a body equivalent to the Human Rights Council of Greenland, with sufficient human, technical and financial resources.63
56. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women recommended that Denmark provide the Human Rights Council of Greenland with sufficient human, technical and financial resources.64
57. The same Committee was concerned about the high prevalence of suicide and suicide attempts in Greenland and recommended that Denmark collect comprehensive data on the causes and address them.65
58. The same Committee expressed concern about the high abortion rate and the high prevalence of sexually transmitted infections among women and girls in Greenland. It recommended that Denmark: (a) collect comprehensive data on the causes of the high abortion rate in Greenland; (b) ensure that education on sexual and reproductive health and rights at all levels of education was gender-sensitive, age-appropriate, accessible and fostered responsible sexual behaviour, with a view to preventing early pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections; (c) ensure access for all girls and young women to sexual and reproductive health services and to modern contraceptives, in particular in rural areas; and (d) provide appropriate healthcare services to women in Greenland during pregnancy, birth and the postnatal period and to their children.66
59. The same Committee expressed concern about the high level of gender-based violence against women in Greenland, and the non-application of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention)to Greenland and the Faroe Islands. It recommended that Denmark adopt a new action plan to combat gender-based violence in Greenland and extend the application of the Istanbul Convention to Greenland and the Faroe Islands.67
60. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to provide information on measures adopted to prevent and respond to gender-based violence and sexual abuse against Indigenous women and children, particularly in Greenland, and information on culturally appropriate prevention and protection mechanisms.68
61. The Committee against Torture was concerned about reports of forced contraception implants affecting Greenlandic women and girls dating back to the 1960s and noted that the inquiry commission's mandate did not cover cases after 1991. It recommended that Denmark investigate all allegations and complaints of forced contraception implants affecting Greenlandic women and girls, hold perpetrators accountable and provide adequate redress to victims.69
62. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to clarify how child protection proceedings in Greenland concerning the removal of Indigenous children from their families and their placement in alternative care took into account the cultural, linguistic and social characteristics of Indigenous Peoples, and asked Denmark to indicate the measures taken to ensure that Indigenous children placed in alternative care retained their cultural identity, language and connection to their community.70
63. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was concerned that the new action plan on the rights of persons with disabilities in Greenland lacked ambition and was vague, particularly in terms of implementation, and that the Faroe Islands still lacked an action plan on disability policy. It recommended that the government of the Faroe Islands

8

GE.26-00776

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
and the government of Greenland adopt action plans covering all rights under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, with measurable targets, adequate budgets and indicators to evaluate implementation, and strengthen training among authorities.71
64. The same Committee was concerned that many persons with disabilities in Greenland either had to choose to move to Denmark for adequate psychosocial and other support or were referred to residential facilities there, and that persons sentenced to detention in a psychiatric institution were often sent to Denmark, making visits by family and friends nearly impossible. It recommended that Greenland improve quality, culturally appropriate support in Greenland, providing community-based housing and appropriate support.72
65. The Human Rights Committee asked Denmark to provide information on the measures taken to ensure the right of Indigenous persons to self-identify as such, and the progress towards the independence or more expansive self-governance of Greenland. The Human Rights Committee also asked Denmark to provide information on safeguards to guarantee the right to free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples before the adoption of measures that could directly affect their rights, lands, territories or resources and before approval of development projects on Indigenous territories, including on consultation processes relating to tourism licences and mining projects. The Human Rights Committee also asked Denmark to provide updated information on the status of the Kuannersuit uranium mining project.73
Notes
1 A/HRC/48/10, A/HRC/48/10/Add.1, and A/HRC/48/2. 2 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, para. 4. 3 CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, para. 43; and CERD/C/DNK/CO/22-24, para. 38. 4 UNESCO submission for the universal periodic review of Denmark, para. 22. 5 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/about-us/funding-and-budget/our-donors. 6 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 3. 7 CERD/C/DNK/CO/22-24, paras. 8 and 9. 8 Ibid., paras. 10 and 11. 9 Ibid., paras. 12 and 13. 10 Ibid., paras. 18 and 19. 11 Ibid., paras. 20 and 21. 12 Ibid., paras. 4 and 5. 13 CRPD/C/DNK/CO/2-3, paras. 21 and 22. 14 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 8 and 9. 15 Ibid., paras. 18 (a) and 19 (a). 16 Ibid., paras. 18 (b) and 19 (a) and (b). 17 Ibid., paras. 18 (c) and 19 (d). 18 Ibid., paras. 12 and 13. 19 Ibid., para. 19. 20 Ibid., paras. 18 (f) and (g) and 19 (f) and (g). 21 Ibid., paras. 20 and 21. 22 Ibid., para. 18 (b) and 19 (b). 23 Ibid., paras. 16 and 17. 24 CRPD/C/DNK/CO/2-3, paras. 41 and 42. 25 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) submission for the universal periodic
review of Denmark. 26 UNESCO submission, paras. 11 and 25. 27 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 21. 28 UNESCO submission, para. 26. 29 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 22. 30 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 23. 31 See also CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, para. 41. 32 UNHCR submission for the universal periodic review of Denmark, p. 4. 33 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 15. 34 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 6, 28 and 29. 35 CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, paras. 22 and 23. 36 CRPD/C/DNK/CO/2-3, paras. 71 and 72. 37 Ibid., paras. 65 and 66.

GE.26-00776

9

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/2
38 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 9. 39 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 6 and 31. 40 CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, paras. 20 and 21. 41 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 26 and 27. 42 CRPD/C/DNK/CO/2-3, paras. 43 and 44. 43 Ibid., paras. 45 and 46. 44 Ibid., paras. 47 and 48. 45 Ibid., paras. 49 and 50. 46 Ibid., paras. 55 and 56. 47 Ibid., paras. 39 and 40. 48 Ibid., paras. 17 and 18. 49 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 32 and 33. 50 UNHCR submission, p. 7. 51 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 14 and 15 (b). 52 UNHCR submission, p. 6. 53 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 15. 54 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 14 and 15 (a). 55 Ibid., paras. 14 and 15 (d). 56 Ibid., paras. 24 and 25. 57 See
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=INT%2FCAT %2FFUL%2FDNK%2F62843&Lang=en. 58 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 14 and 15 (c). 59 UNHCR submission, p. 3. 60 Ibid., pp. 4 and 5; and CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9 paras. 28 and 29. 61 CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, para. 43. 62 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 3. 63 CEDAW/C/DNK/CO/9, para. 17. 64 Ibid., para. 17. 65 Ibid., paras. 34 and 35. 66 Ibid., paras. 34 and 35. 67 Ibid., paras. 20 and 21. 68 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 25. 69 CAT/C/DNK/CO/8, paras. 34 and 35. 70 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 25. 71 CRPD/C/DNK/CO/2-3, paras. 11 and 12. 72 Ibid., paras. 57 and 58. 73 CCPR/C/DNK/QPR/7, para. 24.

10

GE.26-00776

