United Nations
General Assembly

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
Distr.: General 20 February 2026
Original: English

Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fifty-second session Geneva, 4-15 May 2026
National report submitted pursuant to Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 16/21*
Denmark

* The present document is being issued without formal editing. GE.26-02257 (E)

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
I. Introduction
1. The Kingdom of Denmark is committed to maintaining the highest standards in fulfilling its human rights obligations and its responsibility to protect its population. Denmark cooperates with international monitoring mechanisms and special procedures of the Human Rights Council have a standing invitation. The Universal Periodic Review (UPR) provides a solid basis for constructive dialogue on the implementation of human rights.
2. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Denmark has coordinated the preparation of this report with relevant ministries through the inter-ministerial Human Rights Committee as well as with the Governments of Greenland and the Faroe Islands. Furthermore, a draft report was subject to a public consultation process. In preparation of the report several public meetings were arranged in the Kingdom of Denmark.
3. The report gives an account of follow-up on the recommendations Denmark accepted after the previous review in May 2021 and on other developments in the human rights field, including issues raised by the Danish Institute for Human Rights,1 civil society organisations and citizens. The recommendations from the previous review are referred to in endnotes.2
4. Reference is made to the Third Cycle Midterm Report from December 20233 and to the Annex, which supplements the information in this report.
II. Follow up on recommendations and developments in Denmark
Legal framework
Acceptance of international human rights instruments
5. The normative and institutional framework for the protection of human rights in Denmark stands upon an unchanged solid foundation. Detailed information in this regard is included in Denmark's first national UPR reports submitted in 2011, 2015, and 2021, respectively, and in the Common Core Document as updated in 2018.
6. Denmark is a party to eight of the nine core human rights conventions (ICCPR,4 ICESCR,5 ICERD,6 CEDAW,7 CAT,8 CRC,9 and CRPD).10 Denmark ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) on 13 January 2022. The Government of Denmark has not accepted the individual right of appeal to the Committee under the convention. As explained in more detail in the Annex, Denmark has decided not to sign ICRMW.11
7. Denmark has acceded to the Optional Protocols establishing access to the individual complaints procedures in respect of the conventions, to which it is party, with the exception of ICESCR.12
8. Denmark has ratified all ILO13 core conventions. In 2024, Denmark ratified ILO convention number 190 concerning the elimination of violence and harassment in the world of work.14
9. The process for selection of national candidates to United Nations treaty bodies is open and merit-based, but the Government will continue to look for ways to improve the process.15
Human rights in Danish legislation
10. The European Convention of Human Rights was incorporated into Danish law in 1992, while other human rights conventions - in accordance with the dualistic legal tradition - have been implemented through noting "harmony of norms" or transforming the contents of the specific convention into Danish legislation.16
11. In order to ensure that Danish legislation is in accordance with human rights obligations, the procedures for drafting new legislation include systematic and mandatory
2

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
screening of all legislative proposals regarding their conformity with international legal obligations, including human rights obligations.17
Equality and non-discrimination
12. Discrimination of any kind is unacceptable and Denmark is determined to ensure equal treatment, equal opportunities and equal rights for all citizens and groups. All citizens are equal before the law, and public authorities cannot discriminate citizens based on e.g. their gender, ethnicity, age, disability etc.18
13. Danish legislation includes a number of acts confirming this principle, inter alia the Act on Gender Equality, the Act on Equal Treatment of Men and Women as regards Access to Employment, the Act on Prohibition against Discrimination on the Labour Market, the Act on Ethnic Equal Treatment, the Act on Prohibition against Discrimination on Grounds of Race etc., and finally the Act on Prohibition against Discrimination on Grounds of Disability, which prohibits discrimination outside the labour market on grounds of disability.
14. The Danish Board of Equal Treatment considers complaints of discrimination on a number of grounds. The Board may award compensation and invalidate dismissals.
Gender equality
15. Gender equality is a fundamental and invariable principle in all spheres of the Danish society. Denmark continuously works to secure de jure and de facto gender equality and to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and men.19
16. The Danish welfare system is designed to promote and ensure gender equality. The social security safety net is comprehensive, and generous welfare services have contributed to achieving a high level of gender equality in Denmark. In August 2022 the parental leave scheme was reformed to give parents equal rights with regards to parental leave. Now each parent has the right to 24 weeks parental leave with state benefits with the possibility to transfer part of the leave to the other parent.
17. The Act on Gender Equality explicitly prohibits direct and indirect discrimination on the grounds of gender and sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics. As mandated by the Act, the annual gender equality action plan is at the centre of the Danish Government's efforts in this respect. In addition, the Government regularly launches multi-year action plans on specific issues related to gender equality.20
18. In January 2023, legislation entered into force supporting efforts to promote a more equal gender composition in management and boards in private companies as well as in the public sector.21
19. In December 2024, further rules were introduced that require the largest listed companies to reach a set target figure of a 40/60 gender representation on their board of Directors. If the target is not reached by 30 June 2026, the companies are required to adjust their process for selecting candidates to be based on clear, neutrally formulated and unambiguous criteria that shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. The act is a transposition of EU-directive 2022/2381 of 23 November 2022 on improving the gender balance among directors of listed companies and related measures.22
20. Full equality between men and women in relation to military conscription was introduced in 2025. Previously only men were required to make themselves available for conscription, while women could choose to volunteer.23
21. Denmark continues to implement programmes that serve as a stepping stone towards women's access to full-time employment under equal conditions, particularly for immigrant women. In 2025 the Government introduced a new work obligation scheme for certain cash benefit recipients, who have entered Denmark from abroad and do not fulfil certain criteria of length of stay in Denmark and time in employment to contribute actively to the Danish society up to 37 hours per week. The purpose is to strengthen integration of especially immigrant women into the Danish society and improve the employment prospects of the citizens in question through activities such as utility jobs, job training and Danish language training.24
3

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
Sexual harassment
22. Following the second wave25 of the #MeToo movement in Denmark in 2020, Denmark has launched a series of initiatives aimed at preventing sexual harassment in the workplace and in society in general. The Tripartite Agreement on March 2022 on the prevention of sexual harassment in the workplace includes 17 initiatives that consist of both legislative amendments, strengthened cooperation between the Danish Social Partners, increased protection of apprentices and students as well as a continued focus on preventing sexual harassment within the national Working Environment Authority. As part of the Tripartite Agreement, the Government launched an Alliance against Sexual Harassment. The Alliance currently holds 41 members consisting of civil society, employer organizations, unions and youth organizations. For information on the specific initiatives, please refer to the Annex.26
Equal pay
23. The Act on Equal Pay between Men and Women promotes the principle of equal pay, including the prohibition of unequal pay on grounds of gender. The Act requires amongst other things that companies with at least 35 employees must develop gender segregated pay statistics to be discussed with the workers' representatives at company level, if there are at least 10 men and 10 women working in the same function. Furthermore, Denmark is in the process of implementing the EU Pay Transparency Directive in close corporation with the Danish Social Partners.27
24. With regards to closing the pay gap reference is made to the response to recommendation 60.170.
Sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression
25. Since 2012, Denmark has allowed same-sex marriage. In relation to family law, both members of a female couple can be parents from the birth of the child. Same sex couples have the same rights in relation to adoption as heterosexual couples.
26. In 2014, Denmark introduced a simple administrative procedure allowing legal gender recognition for persons who are 18 years of age or older at the time of application. Furthermore, Denmark developed a neutral code ending the use of the transgender diagnosis code "Gender identity disorders". New guidelines on gender reassignment treatments were issued to abolish the previously mandatory psychiatric evaluation. The current legislation on gender reassignment contains relevant safeguards.28
27. Since 2016, it has been possible for children and adolescents to receive medical counselling on gender identity issues and to be considered for hormone-treatment, initially to postpone puberty, and subsequently possibly cross-sex hormone therapy. No age restriction is imposed. However, the first stages of puberty should be entered before starting hormone treatment.29
28. Since 2018, Denmark has provided funding for LGBT+ action plans with concrete initiatives to promote the safety, well-being and equal opportunities for LGBT+ persons. The action plans have ensured a comprehensive and coordinated effort across the Government to address the issues that LGBT+ persons face.30
29. In December 2021, Denmark strengthened the protection of LGBT+ people by explicitly referring to gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics as grounds of protection in the Danish laws covering hate crimes, hate speech and discrimination.31
30. In 2025, the legal position of LGBT+ families was strengthened through the introduction of "co-fatherhood" as a legal concept, which entails that both men in a homosexual couple are considered legal parents.32
31. Sexuality education is mandatory in Danish primary and lower secondary education. This includes conversations about norms and ideals around bodies and gender as well as a focus on family life, reproduction, puberty, sexuality, and sexual rights. Furthermore, since 2023 sexuality education is mandatory in upper secondary education to ensure that the
4

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
students become acquainted with topics like consent, boundaries, contraception and sexually transmitted diseases.33
32. The Danish government established The Commission for the Well-Being of Children and Young People in 2023 to provide recommendations for addressing and preventing poor well-being among children and young people. In its final report from February 2025, the commission highlighted the higher levels of poor well-being among LGBT+ children and young people, and LGBT+ children and young people were also mentioned in its recommendations.
Persons with disabilities
33. Danish legislation prohibits discrimination on grounds of disability and has several mechanisms to secure inclusion of people with disability in the labour market, among others the right to effective and practical measures to adapt the workplace to the disability. Please see annex for further information.34
34. A key feature of Danish disability policy is the principle of equal opportunities, which states that public services should aim at supporting persons with disabilities in achieving their potential on equal terms with persons without disabilities. The principle of sector accountability further obligates all public authorities to make their facilities or services accessible to people with disabilities, as well as to include a disability perspective when developing new policy.35
35. The Danish Government has allocated 25.7 million DKK from 2025-2028 for an action plan for better inclusion for people with disabilities in education and in the labour market. The action plan consolidates the Government's efforts within the area and launches eight new initiatives. The action plan also includes a new goal of 15,000 more persons with disabilities in employment by 2030.36
36. In 2025, a national disability week and an information campaign that will raise awareness of persons with disabilities in the broader population and contribute to removing myths, prejudices and misunderstandings was initiated.37
37. The Danish government has allocated approximately 470 million DKK from 2026- 2029 in total, and 155 million DKK annually onwards, to get pedagogical qualifications closer to the students in the primary and lower secondary school system. The funds are reserved to strengthen the local practical competence development, by either further educating the staff at the schools, or to get the municipalities' pedagogical and psychological counselling to work with the staff at the school on how to make the school more inclusive.
Hate speech and hate crimes
38. Combatting hate speech and hate crime is an important priority to Denmark, and criminal offences regarding hate speech are regulated in the Danish Criminal Code.38 Please see annex for further information.39
39. The Danish National Police is responsible for collecting and maintaining data on hate crimes reported to the police, and statistics are published on the official website of the Danish Police.40
40. When determining a sentence, it should normally be considered an aggravating circumstance that the act was based in full or in part on the ethnic origin, religious faith, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression or gender characteristics of others or similar issues.41 Please see annex for further information.42
41. The Danish authorities investigate reports of discrimination based on xenophobia, hatred and racism against immigrants or citizens of non-Danish origin and ensures that perpetrators are brought to justice.43
42. The National Police has a strong focus on combatting hate crimes, including mandatory training on how to identify, register, investigate and handle hate crimes. The National Police has an ongoing dialogue with a number of relevant stakeholders such as the Jewish Community and LGBT+ Denmark.
5

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
43. In 2025, the Danish Government and a majority of the parties in parliament agreed to a multiannual financial agreement concerning the Danish Police and the Prosecution Service for 2026-2030, and as a part thereof agreed to establish a hate crime coordinator function in all police districts to help strengthen the police's work in relation to hate crimes.
44. The Danish Government attaches particular importance to combat hate speech against LGBT+ persons.44 Please refer to the Annex for information on specific initiatives in this regard.45 Denmark is co-hosting IDAHOT in 2026 (International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia and Transphobia) with the Council of Europe as part of the Danish Presidency of the Nordic Council of Ministers to promote the rights of LBGT+ persons globally.46
Integration of immigrants
45. Denmark attaches great importance in ensuring that all policies regarding rights of refugees and migrants are in full conformity with Denmark's international obligations.47 The Integration Act sets out the legal framework for integration in Denmark and regulates in main features how newly arrived immigrants are integrated in Denmark, including their rights and duties.
46. The municipalities are responsible for the integration effort and must offer all newly arrived immigrants an integration program with the purpose of getting immigrants into the labour market, including up to five years of free Danish language training.48
47. In 2025, the Danish Government implemented a new work obligation scheme which requires certain cash benefits recipients, who have entered Denmark from abroad and do not fulfil certain criteria of length of stay in Denmark and time in employment to contribute actively to the Danish society up to 37 hours per week. Active participation entails taking part in various employment-oriented activities, such as job training, utility jobs and Danish language training.49 Immigrants receive social benefits if they cannot support themselves. Municipalities are also responsible for providing refugees and their children with temporary housing.50
Domestic violence and sexual abuse
48. In 2014, Denmark ratified the Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.
Domestic violence
49. Since 2002, national action plans to combat intimate partner violence and intimate partner killings have been in place. The current National Action Plan (2023-2026)51 is structured around three main areas: 1) Violence is a societal responsibility - coordination and early detection, 2) Action is needed - early and effectively, and 3) The circle of violence must be broken - increased focus on the perpetrator.52 Please see annex for further information on the action plan.53
50. In addition, the Government and all other parties in parliament agreed to prioritize DKK 4,0 million in 2024-2027 to the prevention of sexual assault towards adults with disabilities.54 Please see Annex for further information.55
51. The Act on Social Services contains an obligation for the municipalities to offer temporary accommodation in a crisis shelter for persons who have been victims of violence in intimate relations. The persons may be accompanied by children and shall receive care and support during their stay. It should be noted that the National Guidelines on Residential Accommodation for Adults explicitly state that both the municipality and crisis shelters should be aware that persons with disabilities staying at crisis shelters may require special support, including that crisis shelters should be physically accessible to persons with disabilities.56
52. According to the Danish Child's Act, children have the right to receive help if they experience abuse or violence. Municipalities are obliged by law to use a Children's House as part of the child protection examination in cases of knowledge or suspicion that a child is a victim of violence or sexual abuse, and when the police and/or the health system are involved in the case.57
6

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
53. As of 1 January 2025, Denmark has passed new legislation ensuring children, who are living in crisis centres with a parent, the possibility to start a new school without the violent parent's consent.58
54. The Danish Parliament adopted a law in 2024 that obligates municipalities to offer temporary accommodation in crisis shelters to men who have been victims of violence in intimate relations, on equal terms with women.59 The men may be accompanied by children. The provision still recognizes that women are more often victims of violence.
55. In 2025, the Danish Government and a majority of the parties in parliament agreed to a multiannual financial agreement concerning the Danish Police and the Prosecution Service for 2026-2030, and as a part thereof agreed to establish a commission on intimate partner homicide in order to gather more knowledge on intimate partner homicide in Denmark to support a nationwide and cross-sectoral strengthening of the effort to prevent intimate partner violence and homicide.
Sexual abuse and rape
56. The Danish Government attaches great importance to combatting sexual abuse and rape. The Danish Parliament adopted in 2020 a consent-based rape provision60 according to which sex without consent is considered rape. Lev Uden Vold (Live Without Violence - Denmark's national unit against domestic violence) launched in 2020 a new nationwide and anonymous hotline for rape victims.61
57. In 2025, the Danish Government launched a new action plan to improve the safety of young people, especially young women, in the nightlife. The ten initiatives in the action plan includes criminalization of stealthing, a grant programme on education and awareness-raising for youth on the consent-based rape provision, and a study of the extent and nature of drugging in nightlife.62
58. Denmark has a strong focus on effectively investigating and prosecuting perpetrators of sexual violence.63 In order to strengthen the police and the prosecution services work process in cases of violence in close relationships, stalking, rape and honour-related crimes, a course in trauma-informed practice has been introduced by the Director of Public Prosecution in 2022.64 In 2021 all police districts in Denmark established interdisciplinary specialised teams to handle cases such as rape and violence in close relationships.65 For further information, please see annex.66
Asylum and immigration
59. The Government pursues a restrictive, responsible and realistic asylum and immigration policy that is in full conformity with Denmark's international obligations.67
60. Denmark has ratified the United Nations Refugees Convention of 1951 and the European Convention on Human Rights. It is the assessment of the Government that Denmark is already fully complying with the conventions' obligations on the principles of non-refoulement. The Government notes that detention according to the Danish Aliens Act only takes place as a last resort.68
61. Danish authorities are particularly aware of the special vulnerability of child victims of trafficking. Therefore, a wide range of measures, including individual assistance and support for the child victims are offered in a close cooperation between the involved actors and the child's personal representative. Unaccompanied minors that are victims of human trafficking are appointed a personal representative who supports, guides and ensures the minors best interests.69
62. Capacity utilization at Ellebæk Centre for Foreigners has been decreasing since 2021. There has not been overcrowding at Ellebæk Centre for Foreigners since 2022, but the capacity utilization may change if the number of detained aliens increases. In that case the Danish Prison and Probation Service will take relevant measures.70
63. Under the Danish Aliens Act it is possible to detain asylum seekers and migrants in specified situations, including risk of absconding in cases of return. Detention may in general only be used if less coercive measures, such as deposit of passports, are deemed insufficient.
7

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
Cases concerning minors fall under these provisions, but as a general rule, Denmark does not detain minors after the provisions in the Aliens Act. The same rule applies regarding the use of less coercive measures in cases concerning minors.71
64. The best interest of the child is considered in all immigration cases involving children throughout the entire procedure.72
65. Furthermore, persons, including children, who are legally residing in Denmark have equal access to social benefits pursuant to the Danish Act on Social Services and the Danish Child's Act.73
66. Medical examinations of asylum seekers at the reception centres are currently performed by independent institutions.74
Family reunification
67. The Aliens Act prescribes that when a foreign national, who is granted a residence permit on the basis of family reunification, no longer meets the cohabitation-requirement with the partner or spouse in Denmark, the Danish immigration authorities must always take into consideration whether the couple has ended the relationship as a consequence of abuse and/or domestic violence.
68. This provision also applies in cases where the abuse has been aimed at a child. Circumstances such as abuse and/or domestic violence will be in favour of not revoking the residence permit, even though the couple no longer live together.
69. The immigration authorities will assess whether the foreign national has shown determination to integrate into Danish society, including through studies, language courses or work while residing in the country.75
70. On 1 July 2025 an amendment to the Aliens Act came into effect. The amendment includes amongst others the possibility for an accompanying family to a foreign national working and studying in Denmark to keep a residence permit, if the accompanying family has been subjected to abuse/domestic violence.76
Trafficking in human beings
71. Denmark is committed to prevent and combat human trafficking. Since 2002, National Action Plans to Combat Human Trafficking has been in place, including the Danish Centre Against Human Trafficking (CMM) which identifies trafficked persons and offers assistance and disseminates knowledge about human trafficking as well as offers training and education to relevant stakeholders. The current National Action Plan 2022-2025 further develops previous efforts in the area and it ensures that Denmark will continue to meet international conventions and obligations.77
72. The action plan entails a strengthened effort for victims of human trafficking in all forms, considering the needs of the individual victim, including women and children. The action plan allocates 118,2 million DKK to the area, which supplements existing grants for the general efforts in relevant authorities. The outreach work in the field of prostitution under the auspices of the Government-funded NGO's is reinforced, the specialized accommodation for female victims of trafficking is upgraded, and there is a strengthened focus on the investigation and prosecution of perpetrators.78
73. A new action plan against human trafficking for the period of 2026-2029 is under preparation.79
74. The National Police guidelines identify specific indicators for child victims of trafficking and outlines the obligation for the police to inform victims of trafficking their rights and in cases involving children to contact Social Services.80
75. Human trafficking and human exploitation are distinctively criminalized in the Danish law. Cases are investigated and prosecuted by the authorities. As a result of a political agreement reached in December 2020, a Special Crime Unit (NSK) has been established, whose main objective is to strengthen the investigation and prosecution against the most complex and organized crime. The Special Crime Unit is also able to handle or provide
8

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
assistance to the police districts in certain cases regarding Trafficking in human beings (THB).81
76. As regards access to redress, victims of human trafficking may claim compensation from the offender of the crime during the criminal proceedings or through a civil claim. Further, victims who have suffered physical or psychological injury or damage as a result of a criminal offence are allowed to apply for state compensation in accordance with the rules laid down in the Act on State Compensation to Victims of Crime.82 Please see annex for further information.83
Counter-terrorism
77. Combatting violent extremism, terrorism and its financing is a highly important priority to Denmark.84 Substantial counter-terrorism initiatives have been launched since the 2015 terror attacks in Copenhagen.
Citizenship
78. In accordance with the 1961 UN Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, applicants, who are born stateless in Denmark, can be placed on a bill on naturalisation without fulfilling the regular requirements for acquiring Danish citizenship.85
Deprivation of liberty
Prison facilities
79. The Government is committed to maintaining appropriate standards in prisons. To this end the Government has enacted a number of initiatives to increase the capacity of the Danish prison system, inter alia by constructing new prison facilities, expanding old prison facilities, recruiting more prison personnel and reducing unnecessary administrative burdens. The Government expects that Denmark will have prison facilities for more than 2000 extra inmates by 2036.86
Disciplinary penalty system
80. A new disciplinary penalty system entered into force in September 2023, which has led to a decrease in long-term solitary confinement as a disciplinary measure and in particular a substantial decrease in long-term solitary confinement exceeding 14 days.87 Only in special cases, e.g., repeated offences or especially challenging or aggressive behaviour, the maximum duration can be more than 14 days per decision and no longer than 4 weeks.88
81. Minors can be imposed penalty cell as a disciplinary sanction for no more than 7 days, unless the minor has been violent against staff in the institution. However, minors can participate in employment within the institution, when they are imposed penalty cell as a disciplinary sanction, unless there are specific reasons to the contrary. The above-mentioned also apply to minors remanded in custody.89
Enforced disappearance
82. Denmark ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance on 13 January 2022. The first report of the Danish Government regarding measures taken by Denmark to give effect to its obligations under the convention was submitted to the Committee on Enforced Disappearances (CED) on 3 May 2025.90
Freedom of religion or belief
83. The Danish Constitution contains a number of guarantees in regards of personal freedoms, including the prohibition against discrimination on grounds such as religious conviction in relation to the enjoyment of civil and political rights and the liberty to form congregations for the worship of God in a manner according with their convictions, provided that nothing contrary to good morals or pubic order shall be taught or done.91 In Denmark,
9

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
religious communities do not need any registration or official permission to exercise their religious affairs.
84. Religious communities do have the possibility to register as a recognised religious community through the Act on Religious Communities outside the Established Church of Denmark. The Act promotes tolerance towards and respect for religious diversity in the Danish society by clarifying the rights and obligations imposed when a religious community is recognised according to the Act. The Act was revised in 2025 based on experiences with the application of the law's provisions. The revision, which entered into force on January 1st, 2026, includes additional codification of existing practices to further clarify the obligations imposed on recognised religious communities.92
Health
85. All residents in Denmark have access to free public healthcare services.93 Furthermore, affordable translation and interpretation services are available.94
86. For further information on non-residents' access to emergency hospital treatment in case of emergency, sudden onset of illness, birth, exacerbation of chronic disease etc, please see annex.95
Mental health
87. Denmark maintains a significant commitment to reducing the utilization of coercion within psychiatric care. The most recent comprehensive political agreement from May 2025, which is the final step of the 10-year plan towards 2030, has the purpose of ensuring the necessary capacity and quality of care for psychiatric patients. The aim of the political agreement is also to contribute to the new and ambitious goal to reduce coercive measures by 30% by 2030. This goal includes belts, restraints and forced medication with a particular focus on children and young people.96
88. One of the initiatives in the political agreement is the introduction of new coercive measures of a less intrusive nature in order to reduce the use of the most intrusive forms of coercion, including in particular the use of belt fixation. One example is the possibility to tell patients to go to their room for a shorter period of time (without the door being locked). The new coercive measures are based on recommendations from the Danish Health Authority. The Mental Health Act has to be changed in order to implement the new coercive measures of a less intrusive nature. The changes will enter into force by 2027 at the earliest.97
Education
89. Education is compulsory in Denmark for everyone between the ages of 6 or 7 and 16. Whether the education is received in a publicly provided school, in a private school, or at home is a matter of individual choice, as long as accepted standards are met. According to the Danish Constitution, all children of school age are entitled to free instruction in primary schools. The "Folkeskole" is therefore free of charge, and all children are in general entitled to admission to the school in their respective school district.98
90. All students in upper secondary education with disabilities or similar difficulties are entitled to a range of different forms of support. This applies regardless of whether they attend a special programme, a programme with an extended course or not.99
91. For further information on bilingual students, including students from the Faroe Islands and Greenland, please see annex.100
92. According to The Folkeskole Act, part of the main purpose of the Folkeskole is to prepare the pupils to be able to participate, demonstrate mutual responsibility and understand their rights and duties in a free and democratic society.101 For further information, please see annex.102
93. According to the Child's Act, children and young people, who are lawfully residing in Denmark, are eligible to receive assistance under this Act regardless of their religion or national origin.103
10

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
94. In May 2024 the Danish Government established an expert group to prepare specific recommendations for adjustments to the legislative framework for inclusion, special education and other special educational assistance in lower secondary and primary schools. The purpose of the expert group's work is to strengthen inclusion in lower secondary and primary school so that more students can remain in mainstream education. The expert group published its recommendations in June 2025.104 For further information, please see annex.105
95. Children with a legal residence permit can go to school for free equally to Danish children. Foreign nationals with a legal residence permit can also enjoy free access to Danish health services, justice and education equally to Danish citizens.106
Children and families
96. The Danish Child's Act entered into force on January 1st 2024. The law ensures that the obligations of Denmark in relation to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and the European Convention on Human Rights are respected, especially in regards to adoption or placement of a child or young person outside the home without consent from the parents.107
97. For further information on The Youth Crime Board in relation to criminal cases concerning young people please see annex.108
98. For further information on the Family Court109 in relation to civil cases concerning family matters please see annex.110
99. Since 2021, new initiatives have been issued to improve the quality of foster care and to ensure stability and continuity in the upbringing of children living in foster homes. Funding for implementation of the reform have been allocated from 2025 and annually thereafter.111 Please see annex for further information.112
Social security and an adequate standard of living
100. Denmark has an extensive tax-financed social protection system. A wide range of specific social benefits in case of unemployment, sickness, low income, reduced capacity to work and other socially relevant factors are available to those in need. This is supported by an active labour market policy that supports people with special needs in finding work.
101. The Government takes active steps to combat increasing poverty among vulnerable individuals. There is no official poverty definition in Denmark.113 The Government does not intend to introduce an official definition of poverty.114 Nevertheless, there is great public awareness on poverty and child poverty and there is a lot of data on the topic. Please see annex for further information.115
Social housing
102. Danish legislation aims to ensure equal treatment and equal access to housing for all citizens.
103. Social housing is subject to a set of rules regarding resident democracy. These rules establish that residents have the decisive authority in the operation of social housing. The majority of both the highest authority and the board of directors consist of the residents of the housing organization. The resident board and the resident assembly exclusively comprise the residents of the housing unit.
104. The resident board must present the overall framework for initiating works and activities to the resident assembly for approval before they are implemented. This also applies to the implementation of the action plan against the emergence of parallel societies, including the development plans for "areas of transformation".116 When it comes to the criterion of "non-western immigrants and their descendants," it is important to point out that it is only used to categorize a social housing area. The criterion does not determine individual rights on basis of origin.117
105. A political agreement has been reached to change the term "ghetto" used to designate disadvantaged residential areas in the legislation to "parallel societies" and "areas of transformation". This change reflects an altered approach to addressing the challenges
11

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
associated with disadvantaged residential areas. It entails a greater emphasis on inclusion, integration, and improving living conditions.118
Homeless people and beggars
106. In Denmark, Housing First has been the guiding principle of its homelessness strategy since 2009. Since October 2023, key elements of Housing First have been part of national Danish legislation. The main goals are significantly decreasing the number of persons in homelessness and ending long-term homelessness. Housing First means that persons living in homelessness must first be offered a permanent housing solution, after which efforts are made to address the other challenges, they face.119
107. Furthermore, Denmark notes that the legislation concerning evictions and rehousing respects human right standards.120
Climate change
108. The Government is committed to take ambitious and concrete measures - at home as well as abroad - to combat the negative impacts of climate change.121 The Danish Climate Act sets a target of reducing Denmark's GHG emissions with 70% in 2030 compared to 1990 and Denmark aims to achieve net-negative by 110% by 2050. Denmark is also committed to the goals set out in the EU Fit-for-55 package. Please see annex for further information.122
Combatting racism, antisemitism and discrimination
109. Individuals belonging to minority groups and non-citizens legally residing in Denmark enjoy equal access to, inter alia, employment, education, housing, health services as well as to justice.
110. In January 2022, Denmark published an action plan on combatting antisemitism, which included, among other things, a pool for student-engaging activities that promote teaching and remembrance of the Holocaust and other genocides in primary and secondary schools.123 In June 2024 the Danish Government and all parties of the Danish Parliament agreed on additional 12 initiatives to combat antisemitism, some of which also targets hate crimes in general. Some of the initiatives include the establishment in the Danish National Police of a National Coordinator for Combating Antisemitism and the establishment of coordinators - in the Copenhagen Police District - for combating Antisemitism.124
111. In December 2025, the Danish Government published a new action plan on combating antisemitism. The action plan consists of 17 initiatives among which are both new initiatives and a continuation of existing initiatives. The new initiatives include among others, increased security at Jewish Institutions and a strengthening in terms of combating antisemitic hate crimes online.125
112. Denmark fully recognizes the need to fight racism, and this is a priority for the Danish Government. In February 2025, the Danish Government presented a national action plan against racism with 36 initiatives and the ambition to fight racism in a variety of areas in society as well as society as a whole.126
113. The action plan contains 12 concrete initiatives to fight discrimination against the Greenlandic people. This is a key priority for the Danish Government. In addition to the action plan, the Danish Government presented 12 new initiatives in June 2025 to fight discrimination and racism against the Greenlandic people and increase equal treatment of Greenlandic people living in Denmark.127
114. As a general rule, all children of the mandatory school age, who live or reside in Denmark, must be offered education.128 Please see annex for further information.129
Human rights in Danish development policy
115. For more than 45 years, Denmark has committed at least 0.7 pct. of Gross National Income (GNI) in Official Development Assistance (ODA) in line with the UN target. The Danish development cooperation contributes to realising the global ambition of the Sustainable Development Goals for the world's development towards 2030. Denmark's
12

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
strategy for development cooperation "A Changing World - Partnerships in Development" underlines Denmark's ambitions in this regard.
116. Danish development cooperation follows a Human Rights Based Approach. Denmark remains committed to strengthening and protecting democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and a strong and diverse civil society. This includes support to National Human Rights Institutions and human rights defenders, promoting gender equality and the rights of women, girls and LGBT+ people, the rights of Indigenous Peoples, the rights of people with disabilities, and the prevention of torture as prioritised areas in Danish development cooperation.
Human rights and the business sector
117. Corporate social responsibility and good corporate behaviour are Danish priorities.
118. Denmark has actively supported the introduction of mandatory human rights and environmental due diligence at the EU level through the adoption of the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive (CSDDD), which serves as a crucial framework for businesses to conduct due diligence, respect human rights, and prevent environmental damage. In line with this, Denmark has actively worked to align the CSDDD with international standards such as the United Nations Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.130 Denmark has approached the recent negotiations on simplifications of the directive (Omnibus I) with an aim to reduce burdens on businesses, while maintaining the aim of the regulation.
119. In addition to the work on legal requirements outlined above, Denmark has since 1976 adhered to the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and has a National Contact Point, which continuously encourages and provides guidance on responsible business conduct among Danish businesses and serves as a non-judicial grievance mechanism.131
III. Follow up on recommendations and developments in Greenland
Legal and institutional developments
120. Since the last UPR in 2021, Greenland has strengthened its institutional framework for the protection of human rights.
121. In 2024, the Parliament of Greenland adopted the Act on Gender Equality and AntiDiscrimination. The Act prohibits direct and indirect discrimination on grounds including gender, pregnancy, adoption, parental leave, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, gender characteristics, disability, age, ethnic or social origin, political opinion, religion and belief. The Act established an independent Equal Treatment Board mandated to handle complaints and award compensation. The law also requires publication of genderdisaggregated pay data every two years, and funding has been allocated for the collection of gender-disaggregated data on wages, income and pensions.132
122. In 2022, the Parliament of Greenland ratified the Istanbul convention.133
123. The Government continues efforts to address violence against women and children with a particular focus on Greenland through strengthened data collection. Greenland Police considers the data obtained for case processing (investigation and prosecution) in order to support and qualify whether the preventive projects regarding violence against children and women are effective and sufficient. Greenland Police specifically monitors the development in cases with abuse against children and are in the process of consolidating data to specify and organize ongoing investigations. Furthermore, the Danish Ministry of Justice is currently working on having the Istanbul Convention apply to Greenland.134
13

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
Gender equality
124. Greenland continues to provide initiatives in furtherance of gender equality, including wage parity.
125. In Greenland, the principle of equal pay for equal work applies throughout the labour market. Gender disparities in income are primarily due to the gender-segregated labour market, where women are overrepresented in sectors and jobs such as the care sector, where wages are low.
126. The Government of Greenland has launched a strategic effort to address the gendersegregated labour market and related wage disparities. This is reflected in the 2024 report The Gender-Segregated Labour Market - Strategic Focus Areas, which identifies six priorities: equal pay, education and employment, equality and diversity, parental leave, gender budgeting, and data.135
127. In 2025, a gender budgeting pilot project focusing on the labour market was launched. The method helps uncover structural factors contributing to inequality and enables redistribution of resources to reduce gender-based disparities. The project's primary aim is to identify challenges and build capacity for broader implementation across sectors and government ministries.136
Combating violence and abuse
128. Greenland continues to address violence against women and children.
129. The Government of Greenland has adopted the Action Plan Against Violence in Intimate Relationships 2023-2027. The plan addresses compliance with the Istanbul Convention, notably on prevention as well as protection and support. It also contributes to Greenland's implementation of SDG 5 on gender equality and SDG 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions, with a focus on physical, psychological and sexual violence.137
130. As part of implementation, the plan strengthens data collection by increasing the focus on violence in the national population survey and the Health and Social Behavioural Survey. The objective is to expand available data and ensure systematic, continuous collection, enabling better tracking of trends over time with gender-disaggregated data.138
131. Greenland is committed to continuing the development of programs to combat sexual abuse of children in Greenland.
132. The Government of Greenland has established a specialized clinic as part of its efforts to combat child sexual abuse. The clinic provides treatment for individuals who have committed sexual offenses against children or who experience thoughts of doing so. Demand for the service has been higher than anticipated, leading to a waiting list since the opening.139
133. A Children's Outreach Team has also been created targeting children and young people who have experienced traumatic events such as loss, violence, sexual abuse, or suicidal thoughts. In 2025, the focus is on developing digital solutions to ensure access for children and youth in smaller settlements. These efforts are complemented by the Adult Outreach Team, which focuses on long-term consequences of childhood sexual abuse.140
Children and youth
134. Greenland continues to address child poverty and social exclusion through broad, preventive and social measures.
135. The Government of Greenland currently has no plans to establish a national poverty line. Efforts focus on a broader approach aimed at improving the living conditions of vulnerable groups through targeted social and preventive measures.141
136. Several initiatives contribute to this objective. Preventive and family-support programs have been strengthened, as early intervention often has a positive, indirect effect on the most vulnerable citizens. Partnership projects with municipalities, enhanced access to social services and benefits, and cross-sectoral collaboration are key elements of the Government's approach.142
14

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
137. Statistics Greenland continues to publish annual data on persons in economically vulnerable situations, analyzing income distribution by age, gender, family type and place of residence. These data provide important insight into social inequalities and support the design of targeted initiatives.
138. Building on these efforts, the Government of Greenland works broadly across sectors to improve the living conditions of vulnerable children, young people and their families, while taking into account local differences and needs. Several initiatives address the underlying causes and effects of poverty and social exclusion. The Qamani Strategy includes initiatives aimed at supporting children and youth experiencing psychological distress. These include the establishment of Inulerivik, a new support service for children and young people in need of assistance, as well as competence-building programs for professionals to strengthen early detection and intervention.143
139. Furthermore, improved services are being developed for both victims and perpetrators of violence, ensuring that families in vulnerable situations have access to qualified and holistic support. These efforts not only enhance well-being and safety but can also contribute to reducing social exclusion and mitigating the consequences of poverty.144
140. To complement these efforts, the Government of Greenland is implementing the national strategy A Valuable Childhood, which focuses on early intervention, inclusion and well-being in schools. The strategy aims to ensure that all children and young people, regardless of their background or living conditions, are given equal opportunities to thrive and participate fully in society.145
Climate action and local resilience
141. The Government of Greenland is developing a national climate strategy that will set targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and guide national efforts to address climate change. The process is inclusive, involving citizens, businesses and local communities, including in East and North Greenland, through local workshops to ensure broad participation.
142. A Greenlandic dictionary on climate and sustainability terminology, approved by the Greenland Language Secretariat and launched in September 2025, improves access to knowledge and public dialogue on climate change.
143. Greenland withdrew its territorial reservation and joined the Paris Agreement in 2024.
144. Risk reduction and contingency planning are primarily conducted locally to ensure community relevance and resilience.146
Historical injustice
145. Greenland and Denmark have taken steps to address historical injustices.
146. In 2020, the Danish Prime Minister issued an official apology to the 22 Greenlandic "experiment children" who in 1951 were sent to Denmark as part of a social experiment intended to create a group of role models for modernization in Greenland, but who instead were separated from their families and lost language, culture and family ties. The apology acknowledged the lasting harm caused by the experiment. The Government of Denmark and the Government of Greenland also agreed on a compensation scheme, under which each surviving child - or their estate - received 250,000 DKK in recognition of the harm suffered.
147. In 2025, an independent investigation into contraceptive practices that started in the 1960s collected testimonies from 354 woman describing a total of 488 episodes. The women's testimonies show that the vast majority of the women who have given testimony do not believe that they consented to the contraception they received. Nor do the majority feel that they were properly informed prior to being given contraception. The Government of Greenland has launched a separate human rights investigation, which is still ongoing and expected to be completed by the end of January 2026. In September 2025, on behalf of Denmark, the Prime Minister visited Greenland and issued an apology to the affected women. In December 2025, the Danish Government and a broad majority of the Danish Parliament concluded a political agreement to establish a compensation scheme for the affected women.
15

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
The Danish Government will introduce a bill on the compensation scheme, which is expected to enter into force on June 1st 2026.
IV. Follow up on recommendations and developments in the Faroe Islands
Introduction
148. The Faroese Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Culture coordinated the preparation of this report in cooperation with Faroese ministries and the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. To gather input from NGOs, civil society organizations, and the public, the Faroese Government established a dedicated email address for written submissions and held a public hearing on 22 January 2026. The issues raised included the establishment of an independent human rights monitoring body, comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation, and measures to ensure that persons with physical and mental disabilities can pursue education and professional careers.
149. For developments related to the recommendations from the latest UPR review please see annex.
Human Rights
150. Human rights and democracy are fundamental principles in Faroese society, supported by a democratic system and solid legislative framework. The ECHR was incorporated into Faroese legislation in 2000,147 and the Faroes have contributed to the Kingdom of Denmark's reports to UN treaty bodies since 2004.148 The Government has explored different options for establishing a national human rights institution, adapted to the small Faroese society, and will continue to do so.149 While recognizing the important role of national human rights institutions, the Faroe Islands already have several mechanisms that effectively promote, safeguard and monitor citizens' Covenant rights.150 As a small administration, the Government seeks to avoid establishing new independent organisational units, where existing bodies are functioning effectively and can carry out required tasks. At the same time, strengthening human rights protections remains an ongoing priority. Effort will continue to further develop and improve the organisation of publicly funded monitoring bodies, with the aim of creating greater synergy among them, fostering a professional working environment, and ensuring that they operate in a cost-effective manner.
Integration of newcomers
151. The population counts for about 55,000 inhabitants. Latest estimates indicate that approximately 1,556 newcomers from European and Nordic countries, excluding Denmark, reside in the Faroe Islands, along with 1,961 newcomers from countries outside Europe.
152. The Faroese Parliament adopted a new Parliamentary Act on Integration in 2024.151 The Act applies to all foreign nationals holding a residence permit in the Faroe Islands and aims to improve the social integration of immigrants and the children of immigrants. National and municipal authorities must work together in close cooperation with NGOs, industry, and newcomers themselves, who are expected to participate as actively as possible. The Integration Authority is responsible for conducting integration interviews, and offer courses on Faroese culture and society, while municipalities are required to organise informational meetings for newcomers. Both the municipalities and the Integration Authority must arrange integration-promoting activities and ensure access to public information.
153. Newcomers with children below school age are offered home visits by a health visitor and courses on children's integration. Municipalities are required to appoint an integration coordinator and to provide children who do not speak Faroese as their mother tongue with a structured wellbeing plan within day-care institutions.
16

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
Persons with disabilities
154. The Government continues to ensure coherence in its disability policy across different sectors of society through coordinating initiatives. With a small national administration consisting of six Government Ministries and a total of around 130 full-time equivalent positions,152 communication across ministries is seen as quite efficient.
155. In spring 2024, the Government established an independent monitoring mechanism under Article 33 of the CRPD, following the adoption of the Disability Ombud Act by the Faroese Parliament.153 The Act defines the role of the Disability Ombud, whose mandate is to promote, safeguard, and monitor compliance with the CRPD in national legislation, services, and provisions. The Disability Ombud is inspired by the Paris Principles and adapted to Faroese context. It has a statutory mandate and works to protect human rights and to provide human rights education, specifically in the field of disability. In addition, the Disability Ombud is responsible for raising public awareness about the rights of persons with disabilities.
Gender equality
156. The Government has strengthened its Gender Equality Office and initiated a review of the Gender Equality Act with the aim of adopting a more proactive approach to promoting gender equality, including provisions on sexual harassment.154 Measures have been taken to address the gender pay gap, including a tax initiative that contributes to reducing the overall disparity, and steps have been taken to improve the availability of gender-disaggregated statistics to support evidence-based policymaking.155
157. In 2023, the Government introduced a new action plan on violence in intimate and close relationships, building on earlier plans from 2011 and 2016.156 The plan strengthens professional efforts, information, and education on violence, with particular focus on children, young people, women, and men. Psychological support for victims and their families is being expanded, and psychological violence as well as stalking have been criminalized. A new statistical system was launched in 2024, the support service for victims of rape and sexual assault has been strengthened and a hotline for victims, relatives, professionals, and perpetrators will open in 2026. By 2026, hopefully 16 of the plan's 20 initiatives will be implemented, including strengthening the Women's House and the counselling service, as well as establishing a new Knowledge Department responsible for collecting and analysing data on violence.157
Family and children
158. Previously, there were no legal regulations governing assisted reproduction in the Faroe Islands, even though women residing in the Faroe Islands can receive fertility treatment in Denmark. To ensure equal access to infertility treatment and to clearly define the conditions and rights applicable to such treatment, women have been granted the legal right to receive fertility treatment with the implementation of the Danish Executive Order No. 775 of 20 June 2025 on Assisted Reproduction.158
159. Measures such as increased child allowances, the new Family Contribution Act, generous state education allowances, favourable tax changes, and reduced day-care costs have increased the disposable income of families with children. As a result, the risk of child poverty is notably low, with 7.9% of Faroese children at risk based on the 60% median and only 3.0% using the 50% median, a low level compared to other countries. It should be noted that most welfare services, including education, dental care, and healthcare, are provided without any co-payment.159 Statistics show that single parenthood is the main cause of families at risk of poverty. Faroese authorities have introduced various subsidized benefits improving the financial opportunities for single parents to pursue education. This has shown progress in reducing child poverty. These initiatives can create a more inclusive society and potentially combat social exclusion. Faroese Statistics is further developing data on income and living conditions and the first data is expected to be available in 2026. These instruments are intended to provide political authorities with tools to help prevent child poverty.160
160. Over the past two years, Faroese authorities have been working on a child-welfare project with the vision of making the Faroe Islands the best place in the world for all children
17

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1

Notes

and young people to grow up. The focus is on placing the child at the centre of all support provided by different agencies, with the aim of ensuring that these services are coordinated and integrated to achieve the best possible outcome for the child. As part of this process, extensive consultations with children and young people have been carried out, forming the basis for a new Children's Act that will be presented to Parliament.161
Prison facilities
161. Prison facilities and the enforcement and execution of sentences fall under the competence of Danish authorities. In this regard there is dissatisfaction with the conditions of Faroese prisoners in Danish prisons as well as in the Faroese jail. A joint committee comprising representatives from both Danish and Faroese authorities concluded that the conditions in the Faroese jail were unsatisfactory. Consequently, in 2022, the Government of the Faroe Islands and the Government of Denmark signed an agreement to construct a new, modern prison in the Faroe Islands. The new prison is expected to be completed by the end of 2030.

1 The Danish Institute for Human Rights is the National Human Rights Institution (NHRI). 2 Recommendations from the previous review are referred to in this report as [120.xx], see the Report
of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, Denmark (A/HRC/32/10/Add.1). Our
Midterm Report refers to the recommendations as [121.xx]. All recommendations referred to in this
report stem from the second cycle. 3 Universal Periodic Review of the United Nations Human Rights Council Denmark's 3rd Mid-term
Report, December 2023, Denmark_Mid-TermReport2023.pdf. 4 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 5 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). 6 International Convention on the Elimination on All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD). 7 Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). 8 Committee Against Torture (CAT). 9 Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC). 10 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). 11 60.11. 12 60.2. 13 International Labour Organization (ILO). 14 60.19. 15 60.25. 16 60.29. 17 60.21, 60.26, 60.27, 60.28, 60.31, 60.34, 60.35, 60.37, 60.57, 60.66, 60.74, 60.84, 60.111, 60.113,
60.114, 60.116, 60.117, 60.118, 60.119, 60.120, 60.121, 60.127, 60.145, 60.155, 60.187, 60.225,
60.243, 60.245, 60.246, 60.247, 60.250, 60.251, 60.252, 60.253, 60.255, 60.258, 60.274, 60.276,
60.277, 60.278, 60.279, 60.285, 60.286, 60.287, 60.288. 18 60.41, 60.42. 19 60.129, 60.130, 60.209, 60.213. 20 60.68. 21 60.41. 22 60.212. 23 60.41, 60.42, 60.44, 60.45, 60.47, 60.50, 60.52, 60.173, 60.210. 24 60.178, 60.238. 25 60.211. 26 60.211, 60.129. 27 60.170-60.177. 28 60.41, 60.101. 29 60.100. 30 60.45. 31 60.41. 32 60.41. 33 60.101. 34 60.234. 35 60.38. 36 60.234.

18

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
37 60.104. 38 60.94. 39 60.94. 40 60.56. 41 60.94. 42 60.94. 43 60.98. 44 60.40, 60.41, 60.94, 60.101, 60.173. 45 60.40, 60.41, 60.94, 60.101, 60.173. 46 60.94. 47 60.258, 60.261. 48 60.169, 60.238, 60.239, 60.241, 60.242, 60.249, 60.259. 49 60.169, 60.238, 60.239, 60.241, 60.242, 60.249, 60.259. 50 60.169, 60.238, 60.239, 60.241, 60.242, 60.249, 60.259. 51 60.92, 60.129, 60.131, 60.132, 60.134, 60.135, 60.209, 60.211, 60.213, 60.214, 60.215, 60.219,
60.220, 60.221. 52 60.132. 53 60.132. 54 60.129. 55 60.129. 56 60.129. 57 60.228. 58 60.132, 60.228. 59 60.228. 60 60.128. 61 60.128. 62 60.128. 63 60.130. 64 60.133. 65 60.130. 66 60.133. 67 60.243, 60.245, 60.246, 60.247, 60.250, 60.251. 68 60.252, 60.253. 69 60.154, 60.162. 70 60.248. 71 60.264. 72 60.267. 73 60.270. 74 60.265. 75 60.92. 76 60.92. 77 60.151. 78 60.157. 79 60.157. 80 60.154, 60.157. 81 60.148. 82 60.148, 60.152, 60.157. 83 60.148, 60.152, 60.157. 84 60.273. 85 60.271. 86 60.141. 87 Reference is made to paragraph 92 in the Response of the Danish Government to the report of the
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) on its visit to Denmark from 23 May to 3 June 2024, see in particular Annex 1, table 4 of the Response, 60.136, 60.140. 88 Reference is made to paragraph 92 in the Response of the Danish Government to the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) on its visit to Denmark from 23 May to 3 June 2024, 60.136, 60.140. 89 60.137. 90 60.1, 60.3, 60.4, 60.5, 60.6, 60.7, 60.9, 60.10. 91 60.142. 92 60.142.
19

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1
93 60.201. 94 60.194, 60.197. 95 60.194. 96 60.125. 97 60.125. 98 60.203, 60.204, 60.205, 60.206, 60.207. 99 60.38. 100 60.183, 60.249. 101 60.91. 102 60.91. 103 60.91. 104 60.207. 105 60.207. 106 60.238. 107 60.225. 108 60.230. 109 60.230. 110 60.230. 111 60.224. 112 60.224. 113 60.182. 114 60.182. 115 60.182. 116 60.188. 117 60.186. 118 60.87, 60.88. 119 60.185. 120 60.185, 60.187. 121 60.108, 60.109, 60.112. 122 60.108, 60.109, 60.112. 123 60.45, 60.47, 60.94. 124 60.45, 60.47, 60.94. 125 60.45, 60.47, 60.94. 126 60.46, 60.49, 60.54, 60.59, 60.61, 60.63, 60.64, 60.69, 60.70, 60.71, 60.72, 60.73, 60.74., 60.75,
60.76, 60.77, 60.78, 60.79, 60.80, 60.81, 60.82, 60.83, 60.84, 60.85, 60.90, 60.105. 127 60.49, 60.238. 128 60.204, 60.206. 129 60.204, 60.206. 130 60.113. 131 60.120. 132 60.210. 133 60.218. 134 60.218. 135 60.210. 136 60.210. 137 60.218, 60.219. 138 60.218. 139 60.282. 140 60.282. 141 60.182. 142 60.182, 60.183. 143 60.183, 60.280. 144 60.183, 60.280. 145 60.183, 60.280. 146 60.112. 147 https://www.logir.fo/Anordning/136-af-25-02-2000-om-ikrafttraeden-for-Faeroerne-af-lov-om-Den-
Europaeiske-Menneskerettighedskonvention. 148 The Faroe Islands are subject to seven of the UN human rights treaties these are: CCPR, CESCR,
CEDAW, CERD, CRC, CAT and CRPD. 149 60.285, 60.286, 60.287, 60.288. 150 Government-funded monitoring mechanisms include the Ombudsman, the Data Protection Authority,
the Gender Equality Commission, the Faroese Board of Appeal, the Committee on Media Ethics, the
20

A/HRC/WG.6/52/DNK/1 Faroese Council of Ethics, the Children's Ombudsman, and, as of 2024, the Disability Ombud. The establishment of the Gender Equality Commission, the Children's Ombudsman, and the Disability Ombud were established because of the Faroe Islands' commitments under CEDAW, CERD, and CRPD. Several well-functioning NGOs, supported by the Government, also play an important role in promoting and protecting human rights, including Amnesty International, the Faroese disability organisation MEGD, and the child-rights organisation Barnabati. 151 https://logir.fo/Logtingslog/146-fra-20-12-2024-um-integration. 152 https://www.logting.fo/mal/mal/?id=10882. 153 https://logir.fo/Logtingslog/17-fra-26-03-2024-um-Brekumbod. 154 Javnstøða - Almanna- og mentamálaráðið. For further information on the Gender Equality Policy and action plan please see CEDAW/C/DNK/9 pp. 40-41. 155 60.210. 156 https://www.ammr.fo/fo/arbeidsoeki/sig-fra/um-sig-fra-verkaetlanina/heildaraetlanir. 157 60.284. 158 https://www.logir.fo/Anordning/775-fra-daDK-20-06-2025-om-ikrafttraeden-for-Faeroerne-af-lovom-assisteret-reproduktion-i-forbindelse. 159 60.280. 160 60.183. 161 https://www.bumr.fo/fo/arbeidsoeki/barnaverkaetlanin.
21

