The Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute “shadow report” to the U.S. Human Rights Network for the U.N. Human Rights Committee
1. Accountability for past human rights violations (including police brutality)
From May 2013 through January 2015 there were approximately 1,952 officer-related killings nationally in the U.S.
http://ww2.kqed.org/lowdown/2015/01/28/crowd-sourced-data-show-more-than150-killings-by-california-police-last-year/
In four months of 2015, California police killed approximately 66
23 were Latino males15 were white males
11 were males6 were Black males
3 were females2 were Black females
6 other (were not stated)
according to: http://killedbypolice.net/
This would be 198 for 12 months if they kill in the same proportions for the rest of 2015.
There are no statistics available on the number of California police officers killed in this period, but the number is certainly very small if similar to previous years.
There have been no reports of retraining of California police officers in sessions conducted with the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Lawyers Guild, the NAACP, National Hispanic Civil Rights, National Organization of Women, or Black Lives Matter.
The U.S. Government has done nothing to date to publicize the text of the U.N. Charter, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention Against Torture, the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination among state Government leaders or state police anywhere in the country. Such publicizing is required of all nations when they ratify these U.N. treaties.
While the federal Government does not directly control the activities of state and local police, it does provide assistance to the local police in so many ways that it clearly has the power to require police officers to be retrained to enforce the human rights in the ratified treaties.
In order to begin to deal with this problem, the Berkeley Peace and Justice Commission in 1990 convinced the City Council to adopt the language of Articles 55 and 56 of the U.N. Charter as the Berkeley Human Rights Ordinance, which was done. However, since 1990 the Berkeley Police Department, like all other police departments in California, apparently has done nothing to train its police officers not to shoot anyone.
We urge the U.N. Human Rights Committee to spell out very clearly the duties of the U.S. federal Government concerning police killings by federal and state and county and city police.
In addition to massive illegal police killings, many Non-Governmental Organizations constantly receive complaints about other illegal actions by local police and other Government agencies, including:
Illegal searches and seizures of people’s property
Illegal stopping drivers and searching their automobiles
Stop-and-frisking pedestrians based on their skin color and age
And accepting and using large military tanks sent, unasked, by the U.S. Dept. of Defense
