United States of America NGO assessment of actions government has taken on issue since review |  | CERD/C/USA/CO/7-9 August 29, 2014 (adoption of the Concluding Observations) August 29, 2015 (Deadline for the State follow-up report)  Current Status: Follow-Up Report of the State submitted September 21, 2015
---END TABLE---
Follow-up Recommendation Report of
Attorneys for Guantánamo Bay Prisoner Ammar al Baluchi
and the National Coalition to Protect Civil Freedoms (NCPCF)
For Ammar al Baluchi:
James G. Connell, III
jconnell@connell-law.com
+1 (703) 623-8410
Alka Pradhan
alka.pradhan@gmail.com
+ 1 (703) 588-0404
For NCPCF
Dr. Maha Hilal, Executive Director
innocentuntilprovenmuslim@gmail.com
+1 (608) 239-3369
This follow-up recommendation report will assess Paragraph 22:
The Committee urges the State Party to end the system of administrative detention without charge or trial and ensure the closure of the Guantanamo Bay facility without further delay. Recalling its general recommendation No.30 (2004) on non-citizens and general recommendation No.31 (2005) on the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system, it also calls upon the State party to guarantee the right of detainees to a fair trial in compliance with international human rights standards, and to ensure that any detainee who is not charged and tried is released immediately.
Grade as of November 2, 2015: C1
The United States continues to detain at Guantanamo Bay, and is attempting to prosecute by military commission, only non-US citizen, Muslim men. This is in clear violation of Articles 2, 5, and 6 of the International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (“CERD”).
Actions taken by the State Party
The United States has taken no action to modify the violating conduct at Guantanamo Bay except to note that President Obama made a speech in January 2015 in which he affirmed his desire to close the prison there. However, closure of the Guantanamo Bay prison will have no impact on the continuing trials by military commission of a group of non-citizen Muslim men who have been specifically targeted for this justice system. In their follow-up report, the United States confirmed their view that “both military commissions and federal courts can . . . provide appropriate processes for criminal prosecution,” and insists that “All current military commission proceedings at Guantanamo incorporate fundamental procedural guarantees that meet or exceed the fair trial safeguards required by Common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and other applicable law, and that are further consistent with those in Additional Protocol II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions.” There is no plan by the United States to discontinue the military commissions, which in fact violate both the Geneva Conventions and the CERD.
Impact of the action of the State Party (if any)
None.
Current situation/update of the Issue
The Committee has recommended that all States Party “Ensure that any measures taken in the fight against terrorism do not discriminate, in purpose or effect, on the grounds of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin . . . ” More specifically, the Committee asks States Party, in the application of Article 5, to ensure that non-citizens retain equal protection and recognition under the law, ensure the security of non-citizens from arbitrary detention, and ensure that non-citizens detained in the fight against terrorism are protect by “domestic law that complies with international human rights, refugee, and humanitarian law.”
The United States’ military commissions intentionally target men for harsher treatment based on their religion and nationality, in direct violation of Articles 2, 5, and 6.  While the United States prosecutes men and women of all religions and nationalities in its state, federal, territorial, and tribal courts, as well as courts-martial, it reserves military commissions for followers of Islam who do not hold American citizenship.  The United States has never prosecuted any Christian, Jew, Buddhist, Sikh, Hindu, Jain, Zoroastrian, Rastafarian, or atheist in a Guantánamo Bay military commission; the United States reserves that injustice and degradation for Muslims.
It is well-established under international law that the only exceptions to the principle of equality of all persons before the law are those that are based “reasonable and objective criteria.” Exceptions that have been considered valid in international courts include, for example, “[imposing] limits on the legal capacity of minors or mentally incompetent persons who lack the capacity to protect their interests.” Enacting a new legal system for a defined group of non-citizens from one religion cannot under any interpretation of this exception be considered a “legitimate aim.” Even taking the United States at its word that justice through criminal prosecution is the aim of the Guantanamo military commissions, there is “no reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be realized,” particularly when U.S. federal courts have adjudicated hundreds of terrorism cases since September 11, 2001. Members of the Human Rights Committee have found unequivocally that, “[The principle of equality before the law] is violated where all persons accused of committing the very same offence are not tried by the normal courts having jurisdiction in the matter, but are tried by a special court at the discretion of the Executive. This remains so whether the exercise of discretion by the Executive is or is not reviewable by the courts.”
Further, the Muslim non-citizens who have been charged before the military commissions are treated unequally and are unprotected by the law of the commissions. Their attorney-client privilege is continually violated, they do not have access to much of the evidence that is used against them due to over-classification, and they are kept in excessively harsh conditions that keep the memories of their state-sponsored torture alive. The cultural and religious practices of these non-citizen Muslims are routinely disrespected, contrary to the provisions of General Recommendation 31, including their forceful physical handling by female guards. Perhaps the most basic right of a criminal defendant – to know what their rights are – is denied to them, because under the hastily-formed military commissions system, even the judge and prosecution are unclear on what rights the accused retain.
Perhaps the most appalling aspect of the Guantanamo Bay military commissions is that there is little recourse for the discrimination faced by the Muslim non-citizen defendants, as required by Article 6 of the CERD and proposed in General Recommendation No. 31. This Committee stated in L. R. et al. v. Slovakia that “at a minimum, [Article 6] requires the State party’s legal system to afford a remedy in cases where an act of racial discrimination within the meaning of the Convention has been made out . . .” The primary remedy available to the defendants here is to file motions before the very tribunal that was created for the purpose of discriminating against them, and the only alternative in the U.S. federal court system is to file habeas corpus claims, which are not specific to the racial discrimination aspect. Despite the statement of the United States that “All Guantanamo detainees have the ability to challenge the lawfulness of their detention in U.S. Federal court,” strikingly few habeas corpus claims filed by Guantanamo Bay detainees have resulted in releases. With regards to the military commission defendants, the United States government has already strongly indicated its intention to detain these particular non-citizen Muslims indefinitely, regardless of the outcome of their trial. There is, therefore, no remedy at all under Article 6 of the CERD for the discrimination faced by these men.
The impact of the racially discriminatory military commissions must be analyzed in the wider context of the treatment of Muslims in the United States.  For example, state policies in the domestic context have distinctly targeted Muslims both in policy design and implementation, such as the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System and the PATRIOT Act.  These policies have reinforced the notion of collective responsibility and the social construction of all Muslims as terrorists.   Understanding the role of policy in the context of societal treatment of Muslims is also important.  There is, for instance, a “dialectic relationship between selective enforcement [of laws against Muslims] and hate crime, as the government implicitly signals to private actors that the assumption of guilt based on their race is justified.” In other words, state policy directly impacts societal treatment of Muslims.  This is evident in numerous polls of the American public such as one conducted in 2010 where only 37% of Americans reported having a favorable view of Islam, with 26% admitting actual prejudice against Muslims. Therefore, in a post 9/11 world, Muslims risk being doubly victimized, because of their existence at the nexus between a state and society that views the targeting of Muslims as legitimate and justified.
With the promulgation of the Guantanamo Bay military commissions, the United States has not only failed to prevent racial discrimination in their criminal justice system (as legally obligated to do under the CERD), but have actually utilized the existing prejudice against Muslims to intentionally create a separate, discriminatory justice system. As the United States candidly admits, there are no plans to discontinue the use of military commissions.  Rather, they continue to spend many millions of dollars on an extraordinary tribunal which violates fundamental fair trial rights.  The United States should therefore be censured in the strongest terms for their multiple violations of the CERD.
