United States of America  NGO assessment of actions government has taken on issue since review |  | CCPR/C/USA/CO/4 March 26, 2014 (adoption of the Concluding Observations) March 26, 2015 (Deadline for the State follow-up report)  Current Status: Report filed 1 April 2015
---END TABLE---
Follow-up Recommendation Report of
Attorneys for Guantánamo Bay prisoners
Ammar al Baluchi and Khalid Shaikh Mohammad
For Ammar al Baluchi:
James G. Connell, III
jconnell@connell-law.com
+1 (703) 623-8410
For Khalid Shaikh Mohammad:
David Nevin
dnevin@nbmlaw.com
+1 (208) 343-1000
Issue 3, Recommendation 2 (fair trial guarantees).
Grade: C1
The State party continues to seek execution of six prisoners at Guantánamo Bay through military commissions which do not afford article 14 fair trial guarantees.
As of 1 May 2015
Committee Recommendation
Issue 3: Paragraph 21 (Detainees at Guantánamo Bay): “While noting the President’s commitment to closing the Guantánamo Bay facility and the appointment of Special Envoys at the United States Departments of State and of Defense to continue to pursue the transfer of designated detainees, the Committee regrets that no timeline for closure of the facility has been provided. The Committee is also concerned that detainees held in Guantánamo Bay and in military facilities in Afghanistan are not dealt with through the ordinary criminal justice system after a protracted period of over a decade, in some cases (arts. 7, 9, 10 and 14).”
Recommendation by the Committee | (The State party) should . . . ensure that any criminal cases against detainees held in Guantánamo . . . are dealt with through the criminal justice system rather than military commissions, and that those detainees are afforded the fair trial guarantees enshrined in article 14 of the Covenant.
---END TABLE---
The State party continues to seek execution of six prisoners at Guantánamo Bay through military commissions which do not afford article 14 fair trial guarantees.
Military commissions continue at Guantánamo, with the goal of executing at least six men the United States has subjected to torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.  The State party acknowledges, “There are no current plans to end prosecutions by military commissions.”   The State party seeks to justify its non-compliance with the Committee’s recommendation with the claim that “all current military commission proceedings at Guantánamo incorporate fundamental procedural guarantees that meet or exceed the fair trial safeguards required by Common Article 3 and other applicable law, and are further consistent with those in Additional Protocol II of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.”
The State party’s claim is not accurate.  The State party violates the guarantee of humane treatment at Guantánamo Bay, and the military commissions violate multiple fair trial guarantees, including an independent tribunal, equality of arms, and the principle of legality.
The State party’s military commissions intentionally target men for harsher treatment based on their religion and nationality.  While the State party prosecutes men and women of all religions and nationalities in its state, federal, territorial, and tribal courts, as well as courts-martial, it reserves military commissions for followers of Islam who do not hold American citizenship.  The State party has never prosecuted any Christian, Jew, Buddhist, Sikh, Hindu, Jain, Zoroastrian, Rastafarian, or atheist in a Guantánamo Bay military commission; the State party reserves that indignity for Muslims.
Cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
The State party imprisons men at Guantánamo Bay, especially those detained by the State party’s Central Intelligence Agency, in a manner inconsistent with ICCPR standards.  Between 2002 and 2006, the State Party held the six men it now seeks to execute in secret torture centers.  Among other forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment, authorized agents of the State party drowned, raped, and mock-executed various secret prisoners.   In 2006, the State party transferred the men it seeks to execute from CIA secret detention to Guantánamo Bay Naval Station, but housed them separate from other military detainees and kept them under “operational control” of the CIA.  Even before the State party transferred the six men it seeks to execute to conditions even harsher than those of most Guantánamo prisoners, the Special Mandate Holders had noted potential violations of humane treatment requirements.
Since 2006, the State party has continued to subject the men it seeks to execute to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment at Guantánamo Bay.  The State party held the men indefinitely, without access to attorneys, consular officials, family members, or human rights monitors other than the ICRC until 2008, when it briefly charged the men in a military commission.  Following  abortive military commission proceedings in 2008, the State party continued to hold the men indefinitely until 2011 (for Mr. al Nashiri) or 2012 (for the other five men), when it charged them in military commissions explicitly designed to seek death sentences.  Although the State party has provided attorneys for the men, it continues to deny consular access, visits or simultaneous communication with family, and access by human rights monitors other than the ICRC.
For the entire period since their arbitrary arrests, the State party has held the men in solitary confinement under “super-maximum” conditions, without communal worship, meals, indoor recreation, or educational opportunities. The State party does not permit the men telephone calls with their families or attorneys, even after the death of a family member.  The State party prohibits independent medical treatment for the prisoners, and denies all attempts to obtain rehabilitation services for torture survivors.  All of the six men targeted for execution are subject to these shockingly punitive conditions, but none has been convicted of any crime.
The ad hoc military commissions have consistently refused to remedy these violations.  The State party has prohibited bail, pretrial release, or even transfer to the United States for medical treatment.  One military commission has held that it cannot enforce the defendants’ rights under the Convention Against Torture or the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.  When Mr. al Baluchi sought a humanitarian telephone call with his family following the death of his father, a military commission ruled that it “does not run detention facilities and will defer to the judgment of the facility commander unless that judgment impacts on the legal proceedings in some manner.”  The military commission has held that it cannot even require the State party to release a defendant if he is acquitted.
Violation of fair trial rights
The military commissions were created in large part to undermine and circumvent existing legal protections for criminal defendants under the State party’s domestic law.  Despite limited reforms and assurances from the State party, this disparity remains—as recently as 2013, prominent legislators for the State party lobbied to have the suspect in the Boston Marathon bombings designated as an enemy combatant in an effort to strip him of constitutional protections and make a military commissions trial possible.
Independence
The military commissions violate the fundamental principle that any tribunal—much less a tribunal imposing a death sentence—must be independent and impartial.  While it is true that the two capital military commissions initiated in 2011 and 2012 “have continued with pretrial litigation,” they have done so under conditions which demonstrate that the military commissions are not independent and impartial judicial bodies.
The military judge, most prosecutors, and most defense attorneys are all employees of the United States Department of Defense.  A Department of Defense single body, called the Convening Authority, charges the defendants, chooses the members of the military commission, provides resources for the defense, and reviews the verdict.
Since the Committee’s recommendations, United States Marine Corps Major General (Retired) Vaugh A. Ary demonstrated the control of Department of Defense officials over the military commissions.  MajGen Ary, while serving as Convening Authority, prevailed upon a senior Department of Defense official to order the military commission judges to live at Guantánamo for the pendency of the capital prosecutions in an attempt to accelerate the pace of litigation.  After the military judges ruled this order illegal, MajGen Ary resigned as Convening Authority.
Agencies of the State party’s intelligence community have also interfered with the independence of the military commissions.  In January 2013, an unnamed agency demonstrated its literal control over the courtroom by activating a device which triggered a red light and white noise within the courtroom, and terminated the audio feed to observers outside the courtroom.  Around the same time, defense attorneys learned that the attorney-client meeting spaces contained audio monitoring devices disguised as smoke detectors.  In April 2014, after the Committee issued its recommendations, the Federal Bureau of Investigation suborned a member of a military commissions defense team to provide information about defense activities.  In February 2015, a defendant stated that he recognized the assigned interpreter from a CIA black site; the State party later confirmed that the interpreter had worked for the CIA.
Perhaps most egregiously, intelligence agencies have declared statements by the abused men themselves about their torture and other CIDT to be classified information.  Although the State party has asked to drop some restrictions, it continues to prohibit the tortured men and their attorneys from any public statement about the location of their torture or identities of their torturers.  The Committee Against Torture has specifically condemned the United States’ use of classification to create “a draconian system of secrecy surrounding high-value detainees that keeps their torture claims out of the public domain.  Furthermore, the regime applied to these detainees prevents access to an effective remedy and reparations, and hinders investigations into human rights violations by other States (arts. 9, 12, 13, 14, and 16).”  Under the State party’s system, state crimes become State secrets.
Legality
In the military commissions, the State Party seeks the execution of six men for alleged war crimes between 1998 and 2001 under a statute passed in 2009.  The prosecutions violate the basic principle of legality, also known as nulla poena sin lege or the prohibition on ex post facto punishments.
In 2001, certain of the “war crimes” for which the State party seeks the death penalty—such as conspiracy, terrorism, and hijacking—were not war crimes at all.  Other crimes, such as “destruction of property in violation of the law of war,” were not war crimes in the context of a non-international armed conflict.  For two charges, “attacking civilian objects” and “destruction of property in violation of the law of war,” the State party is deliberately violating the principle of legality to circumvent the statute of limitations in its regularly constituted courts, which expired in September 2006.
Even if customary international law authorizes prosecution for some of the alleged war crimes without a statute, customary international law certainly does not permit imposition of the death penalty.  Indeed, no person has ever been executed under customary international law for a war crime committed in a non-international armed conflict.
Equality of arms
One core element of the principle of equality of arms is that both sides in a criminal prosecution must be able to obtain witnesses on equal terms.  Article 14(3)(e) requires the right “to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses against him.”
Under military commissions rules, the prosecution can summon witnesses, but the defense cannot.  The prosecution has the same power to subpoena witnesses as a military judge.  The defense, on the other hand, may only obtain witnesses by asking the prosecution to produce them, which the prosecution has refused to do with respect to dozens of defense witnesses.  Although the defense may appeal a prosecution refusal to a military judge, the military commission has ruled that it does not have authority to require witnesses to appear at Guantánamo Bay.
The Guantánamo Bay military commissions clearly violate article 14(3)(e) by providing the prosecution the power to summon witnesses and denying the same authority to the defense.  Although the cases are far from trial, the prosecution has already exploited this inequality of arms to prevent inquiry into the torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of the six men it seeks to execute.
The future
The future looks grim for State party compliance with the Committee’s recommendation.  As the State party candidly admits, there are no plans to discontinue the use of military commissions.  Rather, the State party continues to spend many millions of dollars on an extraordinary tribunal which violates fundamental fair trial rights.  The State party has earned the disapprobation of the Committee—and, indeed, the world—for its continued violation of article 14 and other important ICCPR guarantees at Guantánamo Bay.
