United States of America NGO assessment of actions government has taken on gun violence/Stand Your Ground laws since review |  | CCPR/C/USA/CO/4  Current Status: Report of the State Submitted Apr. 1, 2015
---END TABLE---
Submitting NGOs:
Dream Defenders – Miami, Florida. Youth of color-led uprising of communities in struggle, shifting culture through transformational organizing. Contact:  Ahmad Abuznaid, aabuznaid@dreamdefenders.org.  (www.dreamdefenders.org)
Community Justice Project, Inc. – Miami, Florida. Lawyers providing legal support to movements led by communities of color in Florida and beyond through a racial justice and human rights lens. Contact: Meena Jagannath, meena@communityjusticeproject.com (www.communityjusticeproject.com)
Campaign to Keep Guns Off Campus – New York. It is the mission of the Campaign To Keep Guns Off Campus, through research and education, to promote safe college, university and K-12 campuses by educating the general public that these environments are safer without the presence of firearms.  Contacts: Andy Pelosi, Executive Director, andy@gunfreekids.org, Kathryn Grant, State Director, Georgia/Florida, keepgunsoffcampusfl@gmail.com (www.keepgunsoffcampus.org)
Assessing: Paragraph 10 – Gun Violence and Stand Your Ground Laws as of 8 May 2015
NGO Grade:  C1
Introduction
Gun violence featured as a primary concern in the Human Rights Committee’s Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Review of the United States of America, which noted a high number of gun-related deaths and injuries as well as a disparate impact on racial minorities, women and children.  It also reiterated its concern “about the proliferation of [Stand Your Ground] laws which are used to circumvent the limits of legitimate self defence in violation of the State party’s duty to protect life (arts. 2, 6 and 26).” It made a number of recommendations for protections to stem gun violence and called for review of Stand Your Ground laws “to remove far-reaching immunity and ensure strict adherence to the principles of necessity and proportionality when using deadly force in self-defence.”  This report will focus on updating the Committee on these laws and the State party’s actions to address their human rights implications for the rights to life, non-discrimination and equality before the law.
Actions taken by the State party
In Paragraph 27, the Committee specifically asked for the United States to provide information on the implementation of the recommendations pertaining to gun violence. However, the United States government responses to these recommendations in its One-Year Follow-up Response are inadequate.  First, all actions to reduce gun violence noted in the report pre-date March 2014, which shows that despite further urging by the Committee, the U.S. has taken no additional affirmative steps to address the recommendations stemming from the March 2014 review process.  Second, several concerning developments with respect to Stand Your Ground laws have taken place at the state level to indicate that these laws have in fact gotten worse since the review.  This report updates the Committee with events that have transpired since the review.
As the Committee noted, Stand Your Ground (SYG) laws have concerning consequences for the rights to non-discrimination, life, and equality before the law (Arts. 2, 6 and 26).  Concerns about the disparate impact of SYG laws on racial minorities persist as practitioners and advocates continue to examine the way in which these laws are applied, even though the United States has said that the US Commission on Civil Rights (USCCR) will be investigating any civil rights concerns the laws may present. Though this process has been included as part of their 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, there has been little reporting or information about the progress of that investigation.
Whatever the status of that evaluation process, as the Committee notes, a similar effort to examine the impact of SYG laws on the right to life is necessary. During the review, the Committee placed particular emphasis on the incompatibility of these laws with Art. 6, given the blanket immunity afforded by the laws for use of deadly force without imposing any obligation to observe principles of necessity and proportionality which are designed to safeguard against unwarranted loss of life.  While the United States Attorney General has made a statement distancing the federal government from policies like Stand Your Ground, the federal government has done little affirmatively to encourage states to roll back these laws in view of their dangerous implications.  In fact, as explained below, SYG laws are getting worse in some states.  The free rein given to interest groups like the National Rifle Association (NRA) to push forward legislation that encourages gun proliferation and stymie attempts at passing gun control laws essentially put the public in danger as special interests trump public opposition to efforts to expand pro-gun laws like the most recent NRA campaign to pass laws allowing students and others on university campuses to carry concealed arms.
On the other hand, there are few avenues to obtain redress when a person’s civil rights are violated by operation of laws like SYG. Indeed, on February 27, 2015, the DOJ closed its investigation into the death of Trayvon Martin, declining to bring federal charges.  This result is disappointing and highlights the deficiency of these investigations to provide effective remedy to the families of individuals whose right to life have been deprived arbitrarily.
The assertion in the USG’s report that a potential DOJ prosecution of federal civil rights laws can substitute for the broad immunity offered at the state level by SYG laws masks the reality that these investigations rarely produce federal charges because of the high legal standards that demand specific intent to deprive another individual of his or her civil rights.  The investigation into the death of Trayvon Martin, together with the federal investigation of Officer Darren Wilson’s killing of Michael Brown, Jr., are good examples of the way this high bar prevents the federal government from providing a meaningful avenue for redress. Then-Attorney General Eric Holder acknowledged the apparent incongruence between the results of the DOJ’s decision not to prosecute Officer Wilson and the DOJ’s scathing report from its investigation into the racially discriminatory practices of the Ferguson Police Department, a result of the barriers posed by the high intent standard that essentially undermines the ability of the federal government to pursue individual civil rights charges. If the DOJ lowered the standard to a recklessness standard, it could potentially be a more effective tool.  As it is, the federal government offers extremely limited opportunities for redress despite what it cites in its report.
Update of the Issue and Additional Information
Hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Despite advocates’ efforts to draw attention to the disparate impact of SYG laws on racial minorities and their right to life at a thematic hearing where Sybrina Fulton, mother of Trayvon Martin and Ron Davis, father of Jordan Davis testified before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in late March 2014, the U.S. government offered little information about the concrete steps it was taking to roll back these laws.  Citing a lack of statistics to properly evaluate the impact of these laws, the government simply acknowledged the testimony from the IACHR Petitioners.  The remarks indicated that the federal government recognized the potentially dangerous consequences of these laws, yet it is unclear whether it is doing anything to address those consequences, especially as little information as to the progress of any investigation has surfaced since the ICCPR review, this IACHR hearing, and the later Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Racial Discrimination’s review of the United States in August 2014 where Ms. Fulton also testified.
Subsequent studies and legal practitioners note that Stand Your Ground laws continue to have a disparate impact on racial minorities
Last fall, the American Bar Association’s National Task Force on Stand Your Ground Laws (a non-governmental entity) issued its Preliminary Report based on regional hearings. It noted a significant problem in that SYG laws afford individuals the right to use deadly force based upon their “reasonable” fear, yet “reasonable” in this sense is subjective and lacks a clear definition of what circumstances are considered “reasonable.” The ABA Report concludes that this ambiguity makes application of Stand Your Ground laws “unpredictable, uneven, and results in racial disparities.” In cases with almost analogous facts and circumstances, some defendants receive immunity from criminal prosecution, while others received convictions with long sentences. These laws create a dynamic in which the race of the victim and the race of the defendant are better predictors of the verdict than the facts of the case.
A closer look at how the law works in Florida illustrates how these laws can disparately impact people of color’s right to life. The court determines if a motion for immunity from prosecution due to justifiable use of force will be granted through an evidentiary hearing. In the hearing, the court determines by the preponderance of the evidence if the defendant subjectively believed that he had reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or great bodily harm. However, for people of color in particular, a subjective standard of reasonableness can be problematic. It ignores the inherent harm caused by a defendant’s acts, allowing a defendant’s subjective belief in the need to use force to outweigh all other considerations.
The reality of the application of this subjective standard is that the attorneys of a non-white criminal defendant also consider race when deciding whether to file a motion because the hearing on the SYG motion acts is an evidentiary hearing that acts as a mini-trial and therefore a denial can negatively impact the trial later. Thus, these attorneys essentially have to question if a judge will be able to see their client’s beliefs as reasonable depending on their client’s race and culture, which tends in the favor of white defendants because the majority of judges are white and the granting or denial of a motion depends on whether a judge can comprehend a defendant’s perspective.  The result is that these laws have concerning implications for racial minorities’ rights to life.
Gender Bias in the Application of SYG Laws: an update on the Marissa Alexander case
As our last shadow report indicated, the Marissa Alexander case exemplifies how SYG laws discriminate based on gender and race, perpetuating already existing racial and gender biases in the United States criminal justice system.  Her defense counsel’s SYG motions failed twice in the course of a long process, the most recent of which was a rehearing of the case, where the prosecution decided to seek an increased consecutive sentence of 60 years for Alexander if convicted again. Faced with a potential 60-year sentence, Alexander pled guilty to assault in exchange for credit for time served and was released at the end of January 2015.
This case illustrates how the application of Florida SYG laws can be discriminatory as to race and gender because while the same prosecutor could not obtain a conviction for Trayvon Martin’s and initially Jordan Davis’ killers, it could bypass the SYG hurdle to convict a Black woman for her defensive threatened use of force. Indeed, if not for such biases, then Alexander’s actions should have been covered by Florida’s self-defense law pre-SYG, which incorporated the Castle doctrine through jurisprudence.
Update on the Status of SYG laws in the U.S.
Expansion of SYG Laws in Florida with Disturbing Implications
Under the guise of addressing the “warning shot” issue raised by the Marissa Alexander case, the Florida legislature passed a bill with the backing of the NRA that in reality expanded Florida SYG law. Under the new law, a defendant can claim immunity for even the threatened use of deadly force in self-defense.  Yet the statute does not define what “threatened use of force” means and or place any limitations on it. The threatened use of deadly force opens the door for increased gun usage, which in turn may increase the rate of gun injuries and deaths, especially because one cannot be sure of the collateral consequences of firing a warning shot or other use of threatened force. This expansion of SYG in Florida’s self-defense laws is dangerous, as it is disposed to magnifying the existing issues with these laws.  Instead of encouraging conciliatory approaches to conflict, the law encourages escalation of conflict by offering immunity for the use and threatened use of deadly force.
A recent case currently being considered by the Florida Supreme Court has concerning implications for future abuse of the law. In that case, a highway dispute in 2011 escalated to a point where the defendant Jared Bretherick used his father’s gun to hold the unarmed driver of the other car Ronald Dunning at gunpoint until the police arrived.  Bretherick, who was charged with assault with a deadly weapon is appealing a judge’s denial of his SYG motion, arguing that the immunity offered by the law does not put the burden on the defendant to prove that s/he acted in self-defense but rather on the prosecution, which must prove that the defendant did not act in self-defense. This modification of the burden of proof is expected to increase defense attorneys’ use of the motion even more to obtain immunity for people who claim that they used or threatened to use deadly force in self-defense, whether true or not.
Public support for repeal of SYG laws exists, however the status quo persists
As mentioned above, even the 2014 ABA Report by the National Task Force on Stand Your Ground laws strongly recommends that that state legislatures amend or repeal SYG laws. This Report led to the ABA passing a resolution in February 2015 urging all federal and local legislative bodies and governmental agencies to refrain from enacting SYG laws or to repeal SYG laws. The resolution also encouraged the elimination of SYG civil immunity provisions that prevent victims and/or innocent bystanders and their families from seeking compensation and other civil remedies for injuries sustained, among other recommendations. Though just a persuasive tool the report and resolution provide additional grounds and broader support for the swift repeal of SYG laws as the ABA is often seen to represent the ethics and values of the U.S. legal community.
Interference of special interests
The status quo is largely upheld because state representatives have been heavily influenced by the NRA’s lobbying efforts, which promote the right to hold a firearm. Though some state legislators attempted to repeal or limit SYG laws, these attempts have been unsuccessful. Despite campaign efforts and numerous proposals to amend current SYG legislation in several states, special interest groups like the NRA make it nearly impossible for these bills to pass through state legislatures. More direction and creative tools must be employed at the federal level to change this dynamic.
The next wave of gun proliferation laws – guns on campus laws
The overwhelming majority of the more than 4,300 colleges and universities in the United States prohibit students, faculty and visitors from carrying concealed handguns on campus. Following mass shootings at Virginia Tech (2007) and Northern Illinois University (2008), however, special interest groups, most notably the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), the NRA, and state-level affiliates, began promoting legislation removing the authority of a college or university to regulate firearms policies.
Over the last several years, legislation in 40 states across the country has been introduced that would amend state laws to allow any concealed carry permit holder to carry hidden and loaded firearms on both two and four-year college and university campuses. There are several adverse implications for these laws.
Increased risk of suicide
Suicide is the second leading cause of death for college age young adults, exceeded only by accidental death (primarily caused by motor vehicle accidents). On average, about 1,100 college students commit suicide each year while another 24,000 attempt suicide. Whereas suicide attempts by overdosing on drugs (the most common method) are fatal only about 3% of the time, suicide attempts with firearms are fatal more than 90% of the time. The increased availability of firearms to college students increases the chance that the suicide attempts will be fatal.
Intersection with Stand Your Ground statutes
Students of color have expressed particular concern over this type of legislation because of the way it interplays with Stand Your Ground laws. Florida is one state in which students of color mobilized to oppose this type of legislation.  Their concerns stem from the fact that most public universities in the state are predominantly white institutions and the majority of concealed carry permit holders are also white, and therefore their particular concerns for their safety are often drowned out by a predominant belief that guns can promote safety.  Specifically, students fear that, when taken together with the SYG law that allows individuals to use deadly force based on subjective fears, permitting concealed arms on campuses will place their lives at greater risks given the prevalence of implicit bias.
Campus Rape/Sexual Assaults
The majority of campus rape/sexual assaults occur among people known to each other (therefore limiting the possibility that the victim would be carrying a firearm at the time of the rape ) with almost half of the student victims reporting that the offender was under the influence of drugs or alcohol at the time of the attack. Approximately one in ten rape and sexual assault victimizations against college-age females involved a weapon. The most likely combination of factors surrounding sexual assaults on campus, including the presence of drugs and/or alcohol at the time of an attack, indicates that a defensive use of firearms to successfully thwart an offender would be rare.  In addition, legislation allowing for the carrying of firearms on campuses would arm perpetrators and victims alike.
According to the Violence Policy Center, a growing body of evidence suggests that allowing private citizens to carry concealed handguns in public presents increased risk to public safety and, furthermore, does not reduce crime rates. Laws that mandate the removal of the authority of higher education administrators and campus law enforcement to establish campus security policies, by state lawmakers have troubling implications for the right to life, particularly for students of color who already do not feel secure walking down the street because of the color of their skin.  When put together with the immunity afforded by SYG laws for the use or threatened use of deadly force that can embolden gun holders, students of color feel that these laws will expand the places in which their life is threatened by people who harbor racial biases.
Impact of the Action of the State party on issue and Recommendations
As the efforts to expand SYG laws, at times successful, have shown, there has been little impact of the actions of the state party on gun proliferation and SYG laws.  In order to begin to address the issues that these laws and their kin (like the guns on campus laws) present, we reiterate our recommendations in the previous report and further recommend that:
The federal government mandate data collection on the use of the Stand Your Ground defense in states that have the laws, including information as to the race and gender of the defendant(s) and victim(s) , whether the defense was granted, and whether the encounter was fatal;
The DOJ lower the intent standard for individual federal civil rights charges to  recklessness to provide more possibility for effective redress;
Pass greater gun control standards at the federal level and tie federal funding to states based on compliance with these standards, including bringing use of force laws in conformity with international standards on necessity and proportionality.
