United Nations Human Rights Committee
Palais Wilson
52 rue des Pâquis
CH-1201
Geneva, Switzerland
December 9, 2015
Dear Ms. Fox and Ms. Santana:
As follow-up to the October 9, 2015 reply of the United States government to the Committee’s letter dated August 6, 2015, we here include updated information on the ongoing violations of Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) by the United States at the military commission court proceedings being held in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
Additionally, we enclose here as background our previous reports to your committee and to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which cover other violations of the ICCPR and of the CERD:
Follow-Up Recommendation Report (CCPR) of Attorneys for Guantánamo Bay Prisoners Ammar al Baluchi and Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, submitted May 1, 2015.
Follow-Up Recommendation Report (CERD) of Attorneys for Guantánamo Bay Prisoner Ammar al Baluchi and the National Coalition for the Protection of Civil Freedoms, submitted Nov. 19, 2015.
In our Follow-Up Recommendation Report of May 2015, we issued the grade of C1 to the United States for Issue 3 at Paragraph 21 of the Committee’s letter (Detainees at Guantánamo Bay). This grade remains unchanged.
The United States stated in their October 9 reply that “[A]ll current military commission proceedings incorporate fundamental procedural guarantees that meet or exceed the fair trial safeguards required by Common Article 3 and other applicable law, and are further consistent with those in Additional Protocol II of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.” This statement is demonstrably false.
Our previous reports detail the torture of the Guantánamo Bay prisoners at the hands of the government at secret detention centers between 2002 and 2006, and their continuing substandard conditions of confinement, including being held indefinitely without consular access, visits or simultaneously communication with their families, and access to human monitors other than the ICRC. Even the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture has not been permitted to meet with Guantánamo Bay prisoners.
The prisoners currently being tried before the military commissions, including our client, are also held in solitary confinement, without communal worship, meals, indoor recreation, or educational opportunities, and without crucial rehabilitation for the torture that they have suffered. All of these conditions are ongoing, and none of them are compliant with Common Article 3, Article 75 of Additional Protocol I (which contains essential guarantees under Common Article 3), or Articles 4-6 of Additional Protocol II of the Geneva Conventions.
The United States further implies in the October 9 reply that Article 14 of the ICCPR does not apply to Guantánamo Bay prisoners who are being held under the lex specialis of armed conflict. It has been clearly established by the International Court of Justice that human rights law continues to apply during armed conflict: “[T]he protection offered by human rights conventions does not cease in case of armed conflict . . . there are thus three possible situations: some rights may be exclusively matters of international humanitarian law; others may be exclusively matters of human rights law; yet others may be matters of both these branches of international law.” Both humanitarian law and human rights law provide for fair trial rights.
Therefore, outlined below for the Committee are the most recent violations of Article 14 of the ICCPR by the United States at Guantánamo Bay, in addition to the ongoing violations that we previously reported and those under humanitarian law:
On Tuesday, October 22, 2015, it was discovered that access to certain classified evidence had not been given to many members of the defense teams or to the trial judge, a decision that lies with the United States Department of Defense. This is a violation of Article 14(3)(b), as it affects the rights of the accused or even their counsel to access all evidence being used against them. It bears remembrance that under the military commissions rules, the accused themselves do not have access to classified information or evidence.
During the hearings between October 19-30, one of the accused requested information on his right to represent himself. The colloquy subsequently finalized by the trial judiciary included the advice that the accused would not be given access to classified evidence as they do not have the proper security clearance to review it. Therefore, even if a defendant were competent to represent himself, “standby” counsel would continue to have the only access to classified evidence and the only ability to move or argue against it, without instruction from the defendant. This provision renders self-representation impossible at the military commissions, runs contrary to the right to represent oneself under U.S., common, and international human rights law, and violates Article 14(3)(d) of the ICCPR.
The United States has candidly admitted that it has no plans to discontinue the military commissions, and the accused struggle constantly in a system that is heavily and purposely weighted against them. The United States should therefore be censured in the strongest possible terms for its multiple violations of the ICCPR.
Regards,
//s////s//
JAMES G. CONNELL, IIIALKA PRADHAN
Detailed Learned CounselDetailed Defense Counsel
Counsel for Mr. al Baluchi
//s//
DAVID NEVIN
Detailed Learned Counsel for Mr. Mohammad
