United States of America NGO assessment of the follow-up action of the US Government for ICCPR Recommendations Paras. 5 & 21 |  | CCPR/C/USA/CO/4 March 26, 2014 (adoption of the Concluding Observations) March 26, 2015 (Deadline for the State follow-up report)  Current Status: Report of the State submitted on April 1, 2015
---END TABLE---
The Center for Victims of Torture
The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) is an international non-governmental organization dedicated to healing survivors of torture and to work for a world without torture. We provide direct care for those who have been tortured, build the capacity of partners who work to prevent and treat torture, and advocate for an end to torture. CVT is headquartered in Minneapolis, MN with offices in Washington, D.C., Jordan, Ethiopia, and Kenya. For further information, please consult CVT’s website at www.cvt.org.
This Advocacy Report Card will Assess: Accountability for human rights violations (Paragraph 5) and Detainees at Guantanamo (Paragraph 21).
As of 26 / MARCH / 2015
Assessment Grades of the Human Rights Committee for the State follow-up Reply/Action:
Reply/Action of the State party satisfactory:
A: | Response largely satisfactory
Reply/Action of the State party partially satisfactory:
B1: | Substantive action taken, but additional information required
B2: | Initial action taken, but additional information and measures required
Reply/Action of the State party not satisfactory
C1: | Response received but actions taken do not implement the recommendation
C2: | Response received but not relevant to the recommendations
No cooperation with the Committee (NOT APPLICABLE FOR NGO REPORT)
D1: | No response received within the deadline, or no reply to a specific question in the report
D2: | No response received after reminder(s)
The measures taken are contrary to the Committee’s recommendations
E: | The response indicates that the measures taken are contrary to the Committee’s recommendations
---END TABLE---
Accountability for past human rights violations
Paragraph 5 (Accountability for past human rights violations): “The Committee is concerned at the limited number of investigations, prosecutions and convictions of members of the Armed Forces and other agents of the United States Government, including private contractors, for unlawful killings during its international operations, and the use of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of detainees in United States custody, including outside its territory, as part of the so-called “enhanced interrogation techniques”. While welcoming Presidential Executive Order 13491 of 22 January 2009 terminating the programme of secret detention and interrogation operated by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Committee notes with concern that all reported investigations into enforced disappearances, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment committed in the context of the CIA secret rendition, interrogation and detention programmes were closed in 2012, resulting in only a meagre number of criminal charges being brought against low-level operatives. The Committee is concerned that many details of the CIA programmes remain secret, thereby creating barriers to accountability and redress for victims (arts. 2, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 14).”…
NGO Assessment of the Action of the State party on the Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation by the Committee | The State party should ensure that all cases of unlawful killing, torture or other ill-treatment, unlawful detention or enforced disappearance are effectively, independently and impartially investigated, that perpetrators, including, in particular, persons in positions of command, are prosecuted and sanctioned, and that victims are provided with effective remedies. The responsibility of those who provided legal pretexts for manifestly illegal behavior should also be established.
Actions taken by the State party | In March 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States rejected hearing the civil cases of detainees alleging torture against the U.S. government. One of the cases allowed the lower court conclusion that so-called enemy combatants could not sue the government to stand.  Thus far, no senior officials have been held accountable for involvement in the torture program and victims’ right to remedies through the courts have been rejected.  Members of the Obama administration admitted that CIA conduct under its detention and interrogation program amounted to torture. In August 2014, President Obama publicly acknowledged that “we tortured some folks” and CIA Director John Brennan described some of the CIA’s former interrogation practices as “abhorrent.” Assistant Secretary of State Tom Malinowski told the Committee Against Torture that “any fair minded person” would believe the CIA’s practices were torture.  Despite the release of sections of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s report on CIA torture in December 2014 that detailed practices that undoubtedly amounted to torture, the Department of Justice reiterated its intention not to reopen an investigation into the CIA’s conduct. Furthermore, some agencies claim to not have opened or read the full report, which remains classified.  The new chair of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Senator Richard Burr, claimed that the previous chair, Senator Dianne Feinstein improperly transferred the report on CIA torture to various agencies and demanded its return.  On October 22, 2014, four members of a U.S. contractor were convicted of murder, manslaughter, and weapons charges for the killing of civilians in Nisour Square, Iraq.
Current situation / Update of the Issue | The U.S. federal courts continue to block the right to redress for detainees that allege torture while in U.S. custody. The March 2015 decision by the Supreme Court not to hear two of the cases leaves in place decisions by the lower courts to reject the plaintiffs’ right to redress in all cases. The use of the state secrets and immunity doctrines in federal courts has blocked the right to an effective remedy for all victims of U.S. torture that attempted to obtain redress in U.S. court.  In its concluding observations in November 2014, the Committee Against Torture urged the United States to carry out impartial and effective investigations into allegations of torture and to provide effective remedies for victims including compensation and rehabilitation. To date, no actions have been taken to implement these recommendations. No investigations have been conducted into the findings put forth by the Senate’s report on CIA torture.  Although the investigators that carried out the Department of Justice’s investigation into CIA interrogations said that they reviewed the full Senate report and did not find anything new, this contradicts reports that surfaced in January that some agencies have not even opened the full report. In response to a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit in U.S. federal court, a government filing claimed that the Department of Justice and Department of State have not opened the package with the disc containing the full report, while the Federal Bureau of Investigation has not picked up its copy from the DOJ’s Office of Legislative Affairs. The Department of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency have both allowed only limited access and made “very limited” use of the report, according to the filing.
Impact of the Action of the State party (if any) | The decision by some agencies, including the Departments of State and Justice, not to read the full CIA torture report impedes both accountability and non-repetition. Without reading the report, the agencies cannot know the full scope of the Senate’s findings and will not know whether the Department of Justice’s (DOJ) own investigations were based on a complete record. As the DOJ’s investigative record remains private, there is no public accounting for its thoroughness and impartiality. The decision by much of the administration not to open and read the full Senate report thus affects its decision not to fully investigate and prosecute torturers.  The decision by some agencies to completely ignore the existence of the full report, as well as Senator Burr’s demand that it be returned to the Senate, are an apparent move to impede the right to an effective remedy and judicial redress. The January 2015 filing in the Freedom of Information Act lawsuit that claims several agencies have not opened their copies of the full report indicates an intention to ensure that the public cannot obtain the report through such lawsuits. Such moves would impede the right to an effective remedy by obscuring the full details of CIA torture from the public and perpetuate the use of the state secrets doctrine to obstruct lawsuits.  The release of the CIA torture report led to a motion in the ongoing military commissions cases to declassify some experiences of detainees facing trial. A motion by the Prosecution in the ongoing military commissions cases would declassify some information about the methods used by the CIA against the defendants in these cases including the techniques, duration, frequency, sequencing, and the conditions of confinement. This is a step towards a more fair military commissions trial process, however, much information remains classified even under this order.
Other Comments | 
Recommendation by the Committee | The State party should also consider the full incorporation of the doctrine of “command responsibility” in its criminal law and declassify and make public the report of the Senate Special Committee on Intelligence into the CIA secret detention programme;
Actions taken by the State party | Redacted parts of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s report on CIA torture – totally 500 pages - were released on December 9, 2014. The Executive Summary and Findings and Conclusions of the report were released, which offered new information about the CIA’s secret detention and interrogation program. The Committee also transferred copies of the full 6,700-page report to relevant government agencies to fully review and ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated.  As noted above, in January Senator Burr and several government agencies attempt to thwart any future attempts to obtain public release of the full report (6,700 pages), which contains significantly more details than the released summary and findings (500 pages).  On March 31, 2015, a federal district court granted summary judgment to the United States in a Freedom of Information Act case that was seeking to declassify a CIA document (“The Panetta Review”) that SSCI Committee members claim confirms much of the details of the Senate’s own report. The court’s judgment will maintain classification of the document.
Current situation / Update of the Issue | The release of the executive summary, findings, and recommendations of the CIA torture report was a positive step, however the full report, which is nearly 6,700 pages still remains classified. The executive summary along with the findings and conclusions that were released only contain about 500 pages of information. The much larger report would provide a full public accounting of the CIA’s program.  Furthermore, because many of the government agencies that received copies of the full report claim that they have not opened the report, efforts to ensure accountability are hampered. Currently, all relevant agencies have copies of the report, but only the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agencies claim to have read it at all. The Department of Justice has given contradictory statements, some claiming the report was not even opened, others claiming that the DOJ read it and the report provided no new information to investigators. A Freedom of Information Act lawsuit is ongoing to obtain full copies of the report for the public.  In January Senator Burr also indicated that the committee that he oversees should return copies of the Panetta Review. CIA Director Brennan also stated that the Panetta Review would not be released by the CIA as it is an internal deliberative document that is not subject to the committee’s oversight. If this document reaffirms the Senate’s findings, then it would contradict the public rhetoric of the CIA about the program and conclusions of the report.
Impact of the Action of the State party (if any) | The release of the report has also had some impact on the impetus for legislation and executive reform. Senator Feinstein, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee that initiated, investigated and released portions of the report, presented the administration and Congress with recommendations on ensuring that the actions are never repeated. These measures included legislative and administrative fixes that would strengthen the absolute prohibition on torture in US law and policies. However, no concrete action has been taken on these fronts yet.
Other Comments | 
Overall NGO Grades for the follow-up Action of the State party: A: Action largely satisfactory; B1: Substantive action taken, but further action desirable; B2: Initial steps taken, but substantial action required; C1: Some actions taken, but recommendations are not really implemented; C2: No action taken; E: measures taken are contrary to the recommendations | C1
---END TABLE---
Detainees at Guantánamo Bay
Paragraph 21 (Detainees at Guantanamo Bay): “While noting the President’s commitment to closing the Guantánamo Bay facility and the appointment of Special Envoys at the United States Departments of State and of Defense to continue to pursue the transfer of designated detainees, the Committee regrets that no timeline for closure of the facility has been provided. The Committee is also concerned that detainees held in Guantánamo Bay and in military facilities in Afghanistan are not dealt with through the ordinary criminal justice system after a protracted period of over a decade, in some cases (arts. 7, 9, 10 and 14).”
NGO Assessment of the Action of the State party on the Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation by the Committee | The State party should expedite the transfer of detainees designated for transfer, including to Yemen, as well as the process of periodic review for Guantánamo detainees and ensure either their trial or their immediate release and the closure of the Guantánamo Bay facility.
Actions taken by the State party | Since March 2014, 30 detainees have been transferred from the Guantánamo Bay facility to home or third countries. On May 30, 2014 five detainees were transferred to Qatar in exchange for U.S. Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, who was held by the Taliban. In November 2014, three detainees were sent to Georgia, all of them from Yemen. Two other detainees were sent to Slovakia, one from Yemen and one from Tunisia. In December 2014, six detainees were transferred to Uruguay, four Afghan detainees were repatriated to Afghanistan, and another five were transferred to Kazakhstan. So far in 2015, five Yemeni detainees were transferred out of the prison, four to Oman and one to Estonia.  In December 2014, the U.S. Congress passed, and the President signed, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014, which included measures that lowered the barriers on transferring detainees overseas while still banning transfers to the United States. This allowed the administration to continue foreign transfers of detainees, including to Yemen. However, the administration has not transferred any detainees to Yemen citing the security situation there.  In his State of the Union address on January 20, 2015, President Obama recommitted his administration to closing the Guantanamo Bay detention facility.  In addition, since March 2014, twelve detainees have had hearings before the Periodic Review Board. Seven detainees were approved for transfer while four were not approved and will continue to be held without charge or trial. A final determination has not been made in one case.
Current situation / Update of the Issue | The United States continues to detain 122 men at the Guantanamo Bay prison. Of the 122 detainees, 57 men have been cleared for transfer by relevant U.S. national security and intelligence agencies (48 men have been cleared since at least 2009, many of which were cleared under the Bush administration), 33 men continue to be held without charge until the “end of hostilities”, 22 are slated for possible prosecution, 7 currently face trial by military commissions, and 3 have been convicted by military commissions and are serving or awaiting sentencing.  Since the Periodic Review Board process began in 2013, only 13 detainees have had hearings. The PRB has cleared nine detainees and has repatriated two of the nine. It has declined to clear four detainees but has ordered a new hearing for one of the four. Fifty-five detainees remain eligible for review by the Periodic Review Board - 33 held in indefinite detention and 22 referred for prosecution – but have not been considered by the PRBs. At the current rate, PRB hearings will not be completed for all eligible detainees until 2020.  Additionally, the U.S. Senate is considering legislation that would roll back much of the progress made in 2014 on easing foreign transfer restrictions. The legislation would, in effect, ban all future transfers of Guantanamo detainees to any country for 2 years and reinstate the previous stricter transfer restrictions and make them permanent.  Finally, on December 31, 2014 the U.S. State Department envoy for closing Guantanamo resigned and has not been replaced.
Impact of the Action of the State party (if any) | As a result of the Obama administration’s transfer of detainees to foreign countries, the population of the prison facility has been reduced to 122. The plurality of detainees has been cleared for transfer, but the administration has not transferred any cleared detainees since January 2015. It is unclear how the ongoing vacancy of the State Department envoy is impacting efforts to continue transferring cleared detainees from the prison facility.  Current legislation before the U.S. Congress is cause for great concern to the Obama administration’s efforts to close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay as well as a possibility that a future administration may decide to keep it open.  The slow pace of the Periodic Review Board process has left 55 detainees in the prison whose cases have not been reviewed, and raising serious concern of whether detainees will be afforded a review during the Obama administration’s remaining tenure.  The continued, prolonged detention without charge or trial of most of the 122 detainees held at the prison in Guantanamo Bay can cause serious physical and psychological harms and can rise to the level of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, in violation of articles 7 and 10 of the ICCPR.
Other Comments | 
Recommendation by the Committee | (The State party) should end the system of administrative detention without charge or trial and ensure that any criminal cases against detainees held in Guantánamo and in military facilities in Afghanistan are dealt with through the criminal justice system rather than military commissions, and that those detainees are afforded the fair trial guarantees enshrined in article 14 of the Covenant.
Actions taken by the State party | The only action taken to implement this recommendation has been the transfer of one detainee in Afghanistan to face a federal trial in the United States. In October 2014, Irek Hamidullin, who had been detained in Afghanistan, was transferred to the United States for trial in federal court in Virginia. He made his first court appearance in November 2014.  On December 10, 2014, the United States handed over control of its last detention center in Afghanistan to the government of Afghanistan. The United States no longer operates any detention facilities in Afghanistan.  The National Defense Authorization Act, passed in December 2014 continues to restrict the transfer of detainees from Guantanamo to the United States for prosecution, detention, or any other purpose. Although no new detainees were brought to Guantanamo, those subject to military commissions continue to be tried in the military system.
Current situation / Update of the Issue | 90 of the 122 detainees remaining at the Guantanamo detention facility are held in detention without trial, with 57 of them cleared for release. 22 others have been referred for possible prosecution, but are eligible for review by the PRB process. Ten detainees are currently on trial, have been sentenced or are awaiting sentence. Trials in the military commissions are subject to continued delays as various procedural issues are litigated. A finding of unlawful command influence by a military commissions trial judge led the military to rescind an order forcing military commissions judges to live in Guantanamo during the course of the trials.
Impact of the Action of the State party (if any) | The passage of the December 2014 NDAA banning transfers to the United States has forced military commissions trials to continue. It has prevented the possible federal prosecution of any Guantanamo detainees, although the Obama administration reserved the right to interpret the provision of the NDAA that prevents transfers to the United States in a manner that avoids a constitutional separation of powers issue.
Other Comments | The ban on transfer of detainees to the United States continues to be a cause for concern, particularly as federal courts have successfully and efficiently prosecuted thousands of terrorism cases. In April 2014, the trial of Sulaiman Abu Ghaith in U.S. federal court took 22 days. The military commission trial of Abd Al Rahman Al-Nashiri, which initially started in 2009, continues to this day. The 9/11 military commission trial initially started in 2008. It is still in a procedural phase.
---END TABLE---
Overall NGO Grades for the follow-up Action of the State party: A: Action largely satisfactory; B1: Substantive action taken, but further action desirable; B2: Initial steps taken, but substantial action required; C1: Some actions taken, but recommendations are not really implemented; C2: No action taken; E: measures taken are contrary to the recommendations | B2
---END TABLE---
