United Nations
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

CCPR/C/104/2*
Distr.: General 27 April 2012 English Original: English/French

Human Rights Committee
104th session New York, 12–30 March 2012
Report of the Special Rapporteur for follow-up on concluding observations of the Human Rights Committee (104th session, March 2012)**
The following report sets out the information received by the Special Rapporteur for follow-up on concluding observations and the steps that she took between the 103rd and 104th sessions pursuant to the Human Rights Committee’s rules of procedure. All the available information concerning the follow-up procedure used by the Committee since its eighty-seventh session, held in July 2006, is outlined in the table appended as an annex to this report, which covers the measures taken in connection with States parties that have not responded during the period under consideration, States parties with respect to which the Committee has completed its follow-up activities, and States parties whose responses will be considered at the Committee’s next session.

* Reissued for technical reasons. ** The annexes to this report have been reproduced in the form and in the language in which they were
received.
GE.12-43178 (E) 060612

CCPR/C/104/2*

Evaluation criteria

Reply/action satisfactory

A

Response largely satisfactory

Reply/action partially satisfactory

B1

Substantive action taken, but additional information required

B2

Initial action taken, but additional information required

Reply/action not satisfactory

C1

Response received but actions taken do not implement the recommendation

C2

Response received but not relevant to the recommendations

No cooperation with the Committee

D1

No response received within the deadline, or no reply to a specific question

in the report

D2

No response received after reminder(s)

Ninety-ninth session (March 2007)

State party: Chile
COB: CCPR/C/CHL/CO/5 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 9: impunity for human rights violations committed during the dictatorship and suitability of persons who have committed human rights violations to hold public office Para. 19: negotiations with indigenous communities, land rights State party’s first reply: Expected: 26 March 2008;1 Received: 21 October 2008 Evaluation of State party’s first reply: Paras. 9 and 19: [B2]2 NGO information: 25 March 2009 Centre for Civil and Political Rights (CCPR Centre) and Centre for Human Rights, Universidad Diego Portales; Observatorio de Derechos de los Pueblos Indígenas. State party’s second reply received: 28 May 2010 Evaluation of State party’s second reply: Paras. 9 and 19: [B1]3
1 Two reminders: 11 June 2008 and 22 September 2008. 2 10 December 2008: letter sent; 22 June 2009: meeting with the State party requested; two reminders:
11 December 2009 and 23 April 2010. 3 16 December 2010: letter sent; 31 January 2011: letter from the State party requesting clarification on

2

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
State party’s third reply received: 5 October 2011
Summary of third reply – paragraph 9:
Under article 105 of the Criminal Code, legal prohibitions resulting from the commission of a criminal act shall last for the amount of time set for prescription of the punishment … This rule does not apply to prohibitions on the exercise of political rights.
Judges can no longer apply mechanisms exempting individuals from criminal responsibility in cases of crimes against humanity, which were declared imprescriptible by the Supreme Court in 2006.
However, the Supreme Court applies the concept of “partial prescription” (prescripción gradual) under article 103 of the Criminal Code, considering that “where prescription cannot be applied in criminal proceedings, as it would absolve the individual of criminal responsibility, median, partial or incomplete prescription can be applied, as it constitutes grounds for reducing the sentence … [its consequences] are completely different [from those of prescription]. It is a mitigating circumstance which allows only for a reduction of the corresponding punishment. While, like extinctive prescription, it is applied on the basis of the passage of time, it cannot be considered to have the same legal status, since extinctive prescription is based on the principle of legal certainty …”.
Under the principle of the separation of powers, the executive cannot interfere in the decisions of the judiciary. Nevertheless, it continues to work to ensure the incorporation into the legal system of international human rights standards and the duties to punish offences and guarantee rights, which preclude the use of prescription as an automatic exonerating mechanism.
Evaluation – paragraph 9:
[D1]: The State party does not provide any information on banning persons convicted of human rights violations from exercising public functions.
[B1]: Recalling the principles set out in paragraph 4 of general comment No. 31, the State party should be asked to provide additional information in its next periodic report on the manner and circumstances of the application by the Supreme Court of progressive prescription and on measures taken to ensure that it does not give rise to impunity for human rights violations (para. 9).
Summary of third reply – paragraph 19:
Description of the laws adopted to protect the rights of indigenous peoples and to guarantee and respect their integrity, including Act No. 19.253 establishing the National Indigenous Development Corporation. Article 1 of the Act refers to the earth as the cornerstone of Indians’ existence and culture and adds that the State and society have a duty to protect Indian lands and to ensure the judicious use of their resources. Article 12 of the Act specifies what land qualifies as Indian land and provides for protection mechanisms, setting limits on legal transactions that might be prejudicial. The Act regulates the division of Indian lands and related rights of succession (the provisions are described in the State party’s reply). Between 1994 and 2010, a total of 667,457 hectares were acquired by or transmitted to Indian persons or communities.

what additional information is required; 20 April 2011: letter clarifying what information is required; 2 August 2011: reminder.

GE.12-43178

3

CCPR/C/104/2*
Evaluation – paragraph 19: [A] Additional information provided – paragraph 7: Significant amendments have been made to the Counter-Terrorism Act since September 2010. The members of the Mapuche community have been reclassified so that the CounterTerrorism Act no longer applies to them. The concept of a terrorist act has been defined more restrictively; and changes have been made to the procedure and the military justice system. Evaluation – paragraph 7: No follow-up to this paragraph. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis and indicating that the supplementary information that has been requested should be included in the periodic report due on 1 March 2012 or in an addendum thereto. Next periodic report: 1 April 2012
Ninety-third session (July 2008)
State party: France
COB: CCPR/C/FRA/CO/4, adopted in July 2008 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 12: statistical data disaggregated by racial, ethnic and national origin Para. 18: detention of undocumented foreign nationals and asylum seekers; detention centres Para. 20: procedure for deporting foreign nationals/asylum seekers State party’s first reply: Expected: 22 July 2009; Received: 20 July 2009 Evaluation of State party’s first reply: Para. 12: [A] Para. 18 and 20: [B2]4 State party’s second reply received: 9 July 2010 Evaluation of State party’s second reply: Para. 12: [A] Paras. 18 and 20: [B2] (para. 20: [A] on the issue of assurances)5 State party’s third reply received: 8 November 2011

4 Letter from the Committee sent on 11 January 2010. 5 Letter from the Committee sent on 16 December 2010; 17 January 2011: request for clarification on
information required. 20 April 2011: letter clarifying information required; 2 August 2011: reminder.

4

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

Summary of third reply – paragraph 18:
The immigration situation is very different in overseas departments, regions and communities (DROM-COM). The Government has built administrative detention centres in DROM-COM with high levels of illegal immigration: Guadeloupe, French Guyana, Réunion and Mayotte. The Government has also built permanent or temporary administrative detention facilities in other locations (statistical information provided on administrative detention centres and facilities in DROM-COM).
Administrative detention is regulated by the Code on the Entry and Residence of Aliens and the Right of Asylum. The Decree of 30 May 2005 sets out the standards for facilities in administrative detention centres, taking into account the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT). A circular dated June 2010 specifies which personal items detainees are allowed to keep with them and the conditions for solitary confinement. It prohibits the use of shackles and handcuffs, apart from in exceptional cases. Since January 2010, the task of providing information and assistance to foreign nationals in detention on the exercise of their rights is shared between five associations. Efforts are also being made to improve training for staff in the centres.
Renovation work has been carried out at the administrative detention centre in Guadeloupe (2009–2010) and French Guyana (2007–2008) (bringing equipment and operations up to standard). CPT visited the administrative detention centre in French Guyana in the autumn of 2008. Its recommendations were taken into account by the Government. The administrative detention centre in Mayotte was renovated in 2008 in anticipation of the construction of a new one by the end of 2014. No renovations were deemed necessary for the administrative detention centre in Réunion.
Evaluation – paragraph 18:
[B2]: The Committee should ask the State party to include in its next periodic report more specific information on the measures taken to improve detainees’ exercise of their rights with regard to health, education, work, family and the regularization of their legal situation.
Summary of third reply – paragraph 20:
1. The sole purpose of the bill in question is to transfer to the National Court on the Right of Asylum the responsibility for ruling on appeals against failed asylum applications. The bill gives the judge 72 hours rather than 48 to issue a ruling. It was adopted on first reading by the Senate on 6 May 2009 and has not been discussed by the National Assembly.
The “priority procedure” is in conformity with Community law (Council Directive 2005/85/EC of 1 December 2005). It is employed on an optional basis, in exceptional circumstances as outlined in the Act. It ensures an independent review with appropriate safeguards. It is not used in matters of “national security”, but only when “the presence in France of a foreigner poses a serious threat to public order, public safety or State security”. The same concept is used to justify the execution of an expulsion procedure. The correct interpretation of the concept is subject to judicial control. The procedure is invoked when the foreign national is from a country regarded as safe, or when the application for asylum is made with a view to overturning an expulsion order.
2. The legislation on the rights of asylum seekers and undocumented foreigners comprises a multitude of different laws, codified in the Code on the Entry and Residence of Aliens and the Right of Asylum. The Act of 16 June 2011 on immigration, integration and nationality introduced further changes. In 2010, France received 52,762 applications for asylum (compared to 47,686 in 2009). The State party accepted more than 2,200 persons under certain special procedures between 2008 and 2010. More than 160,500 persons

GE.12-43178

5

CCPR/C/104/2*
benefit from sustainable protection measures. The Act of 16 June 2011 ensures compliance with Directive 2008/115/EC. It gives priority to the voluntary return of foreigners in an irregular situation. The decision to order a person’s expulsion or ban them from re-entering France is taken following an examination of the individual case. In the case of a lengthy stay in France, family ties or special situations, an individual cannot be forced to leave the country. The administrative judge conducts a thorough examination of the measure and can overturn it. Foreign nationals may request repatriation aid to help them return to their country of origin. Statistical information is provided.
NGO information: 24 January 2011: Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture (ACAT): “Eleven commitments to place human dignity at the heart of political action”. Reports multiple restrictions on the right to asylum.
Evaluation – paragraph 20: [B1]: Additional information is needed on: (i) the frequency with which the “priority procedure” is applied, and the conditions for its use; (ii) the measures taken to ensure that asylum seekers are effectively informed about their rights and obligations once they are in French territory. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis. Next periodic report: 1 November 2012
State party: The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
COB: CCPR/C/GBR/CO/6, adopted in March 2008
Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 9: inquiries into violations of the right to life in Northern Ireland Para. 12: procedure in cases of terrorism, diplomatic assurances Para. 14: investigation and sanction of alleged deaths, torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in detention facilities in Afghanistan and Iraq Para. 15: due process for terrorist suspects State party’s first reply: Expected: 18 July 2009; Received: 7 August 2009
NGO information: 1 August 2009 British Irish Rights Watch 24 August 2009 Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission
Evaluation: Para. 9: [B2] Para. 12: [C1] Para. 14: [B2]

6

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
Para. 15: [B2]6
State party’s second reply: 10 November 2010
Evaluation:
Paras. 14, 15: [B1]
Paras. 12, 9: not included in the follow-up procedure7
State party’s third reply: 19 October 2011
Summary of third reply – paragraph 14:
Updated information on the issues raised is provided in the fifth periodic report of the United Kingdom to the Committee against Torture (see below):
On the Iraq Historic Allegations team at paragraph 445: “Many of the claims of abuse in British custody in Iraq which allege criminal behaviour have arisen years after the event and present difficult investigative challenges. The Iraq Historic Allegations Team (IHAT) … was set up to commit additional resources to investigations and get to the bottom of the allegations more quickly … The Head of the IHAT … was appointed on 6 September 2010 and he leads a team of Royal Military Police and civilian investigators.”
On reparation to victims of deaths in military detention facilities abroad: see paragraphs 125,497 and 498 of report to CAT:
• Reference to a public inquiry into allegations of unlawful killing and mistreatment of Iraqi nationals by British forces in southern Iraq in 2004. The MOD and Army will continue to cooperate fully with the inquiry. Not possible to comment further as the inquiry is ongoing.
• Baha Mousa case: on 27 March 2008 the Secretary of State for Defence admitted substantive breaches of articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) and of article 3 of ECHR in respect of nine individuals detained at the same time as Baha Mousa. The then Minister for the Armed Forces offered his apologies and sympathy to all the families. On 14 May 2008, the Secretary of State for Defence ordered a public inquiry into the death of Baha Mousa. Case ongoing.
Evaluation:
[B1]: Updated information necessary on the progress and results of the work of the Iraq Historic Allegations team; and on the conclusions and decisions of the Baha Mousa case and of the Al Sweady Inquiry.
Summary of reply – paragraph 15:
Para. 33 of the fifth periodic report of the United Kingdom to the Committee against Torture “The Northern Ireland-specific provisions contained in Part VII of the Terrorism Act 2000 were repealed on 31 July 2007 as part of a security normalisation programme […]. Terrorism legislation in Northern Ireland is now for the most part identical to the rest of the UK.”

6 26 April 2010: letter sent; 28 September 2010: reminder. 7 20 April 2011: letter sent; 2 August 2011: reminder.

GE.12-43178

7

CCPR/C/104/2*
Evaluation: [B1]: Additional information necessary on the specificities of terrorism legislation in Northern Ireland. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis. Next periodic report: 31 July 2012
State party: Ireland
COB: CCPR/C/IRL/CO/3, adopted in March 2008 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 11: definition of “terrorist acts” in its domestic legislation, control of suspicious flights and renditions Para. 15: conditions of detention Para. 22: availability of non-denominational primary education State party’s first reply: Expected: 23 July 2009; Received: 31 July 2009 NGO information: August 2009 Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC); Irish Council for Civil Liberties (ICCL); Irish Penal Reform Trust (IPRT) Evaluation: Paras. 11, 15, 22: [B1]8 State party’s second reply: 21 December 2010 Evaluation of second reply: Paras. 15, 22: [A] Para. 11: [B1]9 State party’s third reply: 31 January 2012 Summary of third reply – paragraph 11: (a) The main body of counter-terrorism law comprises the Offences against the State Acts of 1939 and 1998 and the Criminal Justice (Terrorist Offences) Act 2005. Specified offences are terrorist when committed with the intent to seriously intimidate a population, unduly compel a government or international organization to perform or abstain from performing an act, or destabilize or destroy the fundamental political, constitutional, economic or social structures of a State or an international organization. The 2005 Act gives effect to international antiterrorist instruments. Persons charged with serious terrorist offences are tried before a panel of three judges before a Special Criminal Court. Operates within the general structure of criminal law with procedural guarantees. Appeal to the Irish superior court is possible.
8 4 January 2010: letter sent; 28 September 2010: reminder. 9 25 April 2011: letter requesting additional information on the results of the activities developed by the
Cabinet Committee: (a) modalities and frequency of investigation and prosecution of terrorist acts, and length of pretrial detention and access to a lawyer in practice; (b) safeguards in place when relying on official assurances. Two reminders sent: 17 November 2011 - 2 August 2011.

8

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
Persons suspected of offences with terrorist motivation have the same rights of access to a lawyer or legal advice as those suspected of the same offences without such motivation. Solicitors cannot be present during the police interviews. The detainee is informed orally and in writing. The maximum period of pre-charge detention under the Offences against the State Acts is two days. The Senior Garda Officer can request an extension if there are reasonable grounds to believe that it is necessary for the proper investigation of the offence. Where the legitimacy of any extension is questioned, the Senior Garda Officer involved must stand by the decision before the Courts. Persons prosecuted in the Special Criminal Court have the same rights to apply for bail as those charged with other offences. The Act defines as “serious” offences where a person may be sentenced to imprisonment of five years or more. If bail is refused and trial has not commenced within four months of the refusal, a new application can be presented. From 2009 to 2010, the Special Criminal Court prosecuted 32 persons, and 30 were convicted. (b) The assurances received in relation to allegations of extraordinary rendition are clear, categorical and reliable. To enter an aircraft to make an arrest, it is necessary to have reasonable grounds for suspicion that evidence of or relating to the commission of an arrestable offence is on board. No random or routine entry to search civilian aircraft for the purpose of the detection of any offence is permitted. Investigations have taken place into allegations of extraordinary rendition in Irish airports. No evidence was offered by complainants to support their allegations. Evaluation: [B1]: Additional information is necessary on the definition of terrorism. Recommended action: Letter stating that the answer provided on paragraph 11 is largely satisfactory and recalling that the next periodic report is due on 31 July 2012. Next periodic report: 31 July 2012
Ninety-fourth session (October 2008)
State party: Nicaragua
COB: CCPR/C/NIC/CO/3, adopted in October 2008 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 12: killings of women Para. 13: legislation on abortion Para. 17: detention conditions

GE.12-43178

9

CCPR/C/104/2*
Para. 19: persecution and death threats against human rights defenders; freedom of expression and association
State party’s first reply: Expected: 29 October 2009;10 Received: 11 October 201111
Summary of first reply – paragraph 12:
Descriptions are provided of nine projects created to eliminate violence against women, along with their results in the form of the number of persons who visited the Special Police Unit for Women and Children and the number of complaints and decisions adopted.
The Public Prosecution Service has established the Special Unit on Violence and the Office of Specialized Care for Crime Victims. A “directive on domestic violence” and a response protocol to coordinate intervention by judges, prosecutors, police officers and forensic doctors have also been established.
The following actions to promote autonomy among women are described: training sessions; the government policy known as the “Gender Programme” or “Gender Window” launched in 15 cities to build technical capacity among 35,000 women beneficiaries of social programmes.
The Nicaraguan Institute for Women is developing a programme to promote the rights of women in order to strengthen their participation, with a view to reducing poverty and allowing families and communities to flourish.
In September 2010, a bill to combat violence against women, which includes a definition of the offence of femicide, was introduced. In March 2011, the Family Code was approved by the Commission on Justice and Legal Affairs and the Commission on Women, Youth, Children and Family Issues.
NGO information:
The Nicaraguan Centre for Human Rights (CENIDH), the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), the Red de Centros, the Red de Mujeres contra la Violencia, the Federation of Non-Governmental Organizations working with Children and Adolescents (CODENI), 10 February 2012:
(a) The situation has not improved (length of police investigations, delayed forensic reports, lack of detentions of possible perpetrators, low number of cases finally prosecuted, postponement of hearings and trials, large backlogs for the Prosecution and the Police). The possibility of reconciliation and mediation promotes impunity. There is no budget increase to meet the staff shortage. Additional infrastructure and training are necessary.
(b) Concern about cases defined as “minor sexual offences” by the police: they are not prosecuted ex officio and the victims must initiate the proceedings after exhausting the mediation procedure. Paradoxically, perpetrators will be systematically represented, while victims have to pay a counsel. This procedure discourages victims from bringing their cases to justice.
(c) In 2009 only 1,196 requests for urgent protection were filed. 226 women were returned to their homes (0.6 per cent of the complaints). Civil society runs all the shelters and legal and psychological counselling for victims of sexual violence.

10 Two reminders: 23 April 2010 and 8 October 2010; meeting with the State party requested: 20 April
2011; positive response from the State party by telephone: 4 May 2011. Meeting scheduled for 18 July 2011. No State party representative appeared. 11 With a note verbale explaining and apologizing for the delegation’s absence from the meeting in July.

10

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
(d) There is no institutionalized dialogue with human rights activists.
(e) The State report does not mention training to police or other actors working in the administration of justice, the budget allocated to it or cooperation with civil society.
Evaluation – paragraph 12:
[B1] for (d) and (e): additional information is needed on the status of the bill on violence against women and on the results of the programmes described in the State party’s reply in terms of reducing gender-based violence and killings of women and of increasing their direct participation and their representation by civil society.
[D1] for (a), (b) and (c).
Summary of first reply – paragraph 13:
The State’s position on abortion is an expression of its national sovereignty. Action has been taken at the community and institutional levels to prevent unwanted pregnancies and to promote health care, with emphasis on family planning. Contraceptive pills are provided to women. Doctors are not prohibited from intervening when the mother’s life is in danger; in fact they are required to do so.
Projects to improve access to justice play an important role: they create spaces for resolving conflicts and expanding community and restorative justice, as well as access to free justice for disadvantaged individuals.
A department providing specialized psychosocial assistance for victims of trafficking in persons and sexual exploitation has been established within the special police units for women and children.
A national strategy on sexual and reproductive health has been developed to improve the maternal and prenatal health care provided by specialized obstetric units. Standards and protocols have been adopted to serve as guidelines for clinical intervention.
An information programme on gender relations, citizenship, sexuality and values has been included in the educational curriculum. The Ministry of Health received the Premio América 2011 for its progress in preventing maternal mortality through the Casas Maternas (maternity houses) strategy.
NGO information:
All types of abortion are penalized without exception. On 16 March 2010, 21 MPs presented a motion to reform the Criminal Code and allow for an exception in the case of danger to the mother. It was not discussed in plenary. The Supreme Court is considering the constitutionality of the prohibition of abortion. Professionals conducting abortions are still penalized.
Evaluation – paragraph 13:
[B1]: Progress has been achieved with regard to prevention measures, but additional information is needed on measures taken to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of the current family-planning programmes and programmes to prevent unwanted pregnancies.
[C1]: The actions taken do not implement the recommendation urging the State party to review its legislation on abortion.
[D1]: No information is provided on the judicial treatment of doctors who attend women requiring care as a result of an “unnatural” abortion.

GE.12-43178

11

CCPR/C/104/2*
Summary of first reply – paragraph 17:
The prison system is regulated by the Act on the Prison System and the Execution of Sentences. All related activities must be carried out in accordance with constitutional principles and guarantees, domestic legislation and international instruments. The subject of human rights is included in the educational programmes conducted at the School for Prison Studies.
The Inspectorate-General of the Prison System monitors the actions of prison officials and staff. It receives complaints and recommends disciplinary sanctions. The civil inspectorate of the Ministry of the Interior and the Public Prosecution Service can also monitor the actions of prison staff.
The number of minors currently in detention is provided, and measures taken to ensure special treatment and conditions of detention for minors are described, along with measures to prevent juvenile delinquency.
NGO information:
According to the General Budget for 2011, there is an increase of 6.9 per cent compared to 2010 and of 3.1 per cent compared to 2009. This is insufficient to overcome the overcrowding of more than 6,000 detainees. Police cells are used to shelter more than 100 convicted prisoners on the Caribbean coast. The budget for food has not been increased and there is no budget for health coverage. There are ongoing restrictions on human rights activists visiting places of detention.
Evaluation – paragraph 17:
[C2]: The information received does not make it possible to assess the implementation of the principles of international law in relation to prisons. The only steps mentioned are those taken to improve detention conditions for minors, whereas the recommendation refers to detention conditions in general.
Summary of first reply – paragraph 19:
The preamble of the Constitution recalls the principle of absolute respect for human rights, including the freedoms of opinion, thought, association, expression and assembly.
There is no State policy against human rights defenders. The State recognizes the work of human rights defenders and works in cooperation with more than 4,000 NGOs, 29 of which are specialized.
The criminal case against nine women who defended the rights of women involved in the termination of the pregnancy of an underage girl has been closed.
NGO information:
There is still an active policy of threats, censorship and repression against human rights activists by pro-Government groups and individuals. They have not been punished.
Evaluation – paragraph 19:
[B2]: Information is still needed (i) on the measures adopted to prevent harassment and threats against human rights defenders; (ii) on the investigations launched and the punishments handed out to those responsible for the alleged acts of systematic harassment and death threats against human rights defenders.
Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis.
Next periodic report: 29 October 2012

12

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
State party: Spain
COB: CCPR/C/ESP/CO/5, adopted in October 2008 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 13: national mechanism for the prevention of torture Para. 15: length of police custody and pretrial detention Para. 16: detention and expulsion of foreigners State party’s first reply: Expected: 30 October 2009;12 Received: 16 June 2010 NGO information: 4 February 2010 NGO Report – CCPR Centre/BEHATOKIA (Basque Observatory of Human Rights) Evaluation of State party’s first reply: Para. 16: [B1] Paras. 13, 15: [B2]13 State party’s second reply received: 29 June 2011 Evaluation: Paras. 13, 15, 16: [B1]14 State party’s third reply received: 24 October 2011 Summary of third reply – paragraph 13: The Ministry of the Interior reiterates the information provided in June 2011. The draft bill on a new criminal procedure was adopted on 22 July 2011. It amends the regime of incommunicado detention and provides for audio-visual recordings to be made in cases of incommunicado detention, and for the detainee to be visited every eight hours by a forensic doctor and a person chosen by the national mechanism for the prevention of torture. Evaluation – paragraph 13: [B2]: Additional information is needed on the adoption and implementation of the bill on a new criminal procedure and on the main reforms introduced, particularly with regard to the maximum length of police custody and pretrial detention. Summary of third reply – paragraph 15: No information on the subject. Evaluation – paragraph 15:

12 23 April 2010: reminder. 13 25 April 2011: letter sent. 14 22 September 2011: letter asking the State party to include information in its next periodic report on
the operation of the national mechanism for the prevention of torture; developments in legislation and in practice regarding the length of police custody and pretrial detention; the annual number since 2009 of: (i) individuals who requested and were granted access to free legal aid; (ii) deportations ordered, and the percentage of those that were suspended in application of the principle of nonrefoulement; (iii) persons who benefited from the right to asylum and subsidiary protection.

GE.12-43178

13

CCPR/C/104/2*
[D1] Summary of third reply – paragraph 16: Number of cases in which international protection (asylum and subsidiary protection) has been granted since 2009: 2009: asylum in 179 cases/subsidiary protection in 162 cases. Total: 341 2010: 245/350/Total: 595 2011: (up to 1 October) 253/407/Total: 660 Evaluation – paragraph 16: [B1]: The information provided should be updated in the next periodic report. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis. Next periodic report: 1 November 2012
Ninety-fifth session (March 2009)
State party: Australia
COB: CCPR/C/AUS/CO/5, adopted in March 2009 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 11: counter-terrorism legislation and practices Para. 14: indigenous peoples; NTER measures Para. 17: violence against women Para. 23: immigration detention policy State party’s first reply: Expected: 2 April 2010;15 Received: 17 December 2010 NGO information: 20 November 2009 Human Rights Law Resources Centre Evaluation of State party’s first reply: Paras. 11, 14, 17: [B2] Para. 23: [A]16 Second reply received: 3 February 2012 Summary of second reply – paragraph 11: The Government maintains that the definition of a terrorist act is not vague. Nonetheless, it underlines the possibility for the recently appointed Independent National Security Legislation Monitor to revise the definition in the context of its mandate. The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) still has not commenced its review of the counterterrorism laws.
15 28 September 2010: reminder. 16 19 October 2011: letter sent.

14

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
Detention in conditions of secrecy for up to 8 days without a warrant is limited by extensive restrictions and safeguards. A person may only be detained by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) for the purpose of questioning after the issue of a warrant if it substantially assists the collection of relevant intelligence, or when there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person will fail to appear for questioning, will alert a person involved in a terrorism offence that is being investigated, or will destroy or alter a record or thing required to be produced under the warrant. Limitations are tailored to protect national security. The abrogation of the current ASIO questioning and detention powers is not considered.
The expression “for the avoidance of doubt” is interpreted literally. Section 34 ZP aims at ensuring that the questioning can proceed notwithstanding the situation where, for example, a person is prevented from contacting a particular lawyer and refuses to contact any other.
Evaluation:
[C1]: Not implemented: updated information should be included in the next periodic report on the measures taken and conclusions reached by the National Security Legislation Monitor and the Council of Australian Governments (COAG).
Summary of second reply – paragraph 14:
The reinstatement of the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (RDA) in relation to the Northern Territory Emergency Response (NTER) took effect from December 2010. The provisions are now consistent with the RDA. People have the right to take legal action if they consider any of the NTER provisions discriminatory. No action has been initiated to date.
Under existing legislation and funding arrangements, most NTER measures should cease mid-2012. In June 2011, the Government released the Stronger Futures in the Northern Territory discussion paper as the starting point for consulting with Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory to seek their views on future approaches to addressing their continuing high level of disadvantage. On 23 November 2011, the Government announced its legislative response to the issues identified as the most urgent. The legislation will be subject to public scrutiny through a Parliamentary Committee process before being debated by the Parliament in early 2012. If passed, the legislation will repeal the Northern Territory National Emergency Response Act 2007 and include provisions to ensure that children attend school and to address the serious harm caused by alcohol abuse and make communities safer.
The five-year leases over Aboriginal land that were compulsorily acquired under the initial NTER legislation will be ended in August 2012. The objective is now to negotiate voluntary long-term leases with Aboriginal landowners to ensure secure tenure arrangements for government investment in housing and infrastructure on Aboriginal land.
Evaluation:
[B1]: Updated information necessary on: (i) the progress made for the debate, adoption and implementation of the legislation referred to in the reply; (ii) the decisions taken for the negotiation of voluntary long-term leases with Aboriginal landowners to ensure secure tenure arrangements for government investment in housing and infrastructure.
Summary of second reply – paragraph 17:
Addressing the high levels of violence against women is an ongoing process. National surveys on attitudes towards violence in the community will be conducted from 2012. The Government will report on the results in future communications with the Committee.
The national plan to reduce violence against women and their children (2010–2022) was launched to assist in informing future strategies to prevent violence against women. It

GE.12-43178

15

CCPR/C/104/2*
focuses on primary prevention, on improving the service system, building the evidence base and holding perpetrators to account. It seeks to enhance the relationship between government and the non-government sector. The plan will be implemented through a series of three-year action plans around six outcomes, including “indigenous communities are strengthened”. All States and territories will develop implementation plans recognizing the different circumstances and priorities. The implementation will be supervised by the Select Council on Women’s Issues and specialized ministries.
The Plan includes the development of a National Centre of Excellence to develop national research into violence against women from 2012 to inform the design and implementation of future strategies to prevent violence against women.
Evaluation:
[B1]: Progress made in preventing and combating violence against women. The commitment of the State party to report on the outcomes of the surveys it develops is noted.
Information should be included in the next periodic report on action taken for the elimination of violence against indigenous women. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis.
Next periodic report: 30 July 2015

Ninety-sixth session (July 2009)

State party: Chad
COB: CCPR/C/TCD/CO/1, adopted in July 2009
Follow-up paragraphs:
Para. 10: investigation and punishment of human rights violations
Para. 13: forced displacement
Para. 20: investigation and punishment of the events of February 2008
Para. 32: the case of Khadidja Ousmane Mahamat
State party’s first reply: Expected: 29 July 2010; Received: 25 January 2012
Summary of first reply – paragraph 10:
The Judicial Advisory Unit of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad is carrying out projects to promote the rule of law. Objectives: to promote an independent judiciary; to build the capacity of judicial institutions to operate in a manner which is in accordance with the Chadian Constitution and laws, as well as consistent with international norms and standards; to implement the operational protocol of the Détachement Intégré de Sécurité (Chadian police) regarding arrest and detention.
The Government, with the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) through the PRET Project, has implemented a programme in eastern Chad, which focuses on the restoration of the rule of law, local governance and cooperation. Actions carried out: creation of nine legal clinics; establishment of a legal aid fund; training for judicial police officers; support for the Court of Appeal in Abéché to organize circuit courts; logistical support for lawyers in Abéché; establishment of a legal aid office, which provides a framework for conflict resolution. Judicial remedies are recommended to the parties only if mediation and conciliation procedures have failed.

16

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
Evaluation: [B2]: Additional information is needed on the operation of the legal clinics that have been created, on the results of the projects described and on the State party’s role and actions concerning their implementation. [D1]: No information on measures taken to ensure the investigation and punishment of human rights violations, protection for victims, and their access to an appropriate remedy. Summary of first reply – paragraph 13: The Government has received assistance from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to carry out protection activities: legal assistance “for refugees in conflict with the law”; establishment of legal clinics in refugee camps; and support for circuit courts. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) conducts activities in the areas of protection, legal assistance and juvenile justice for women and children. Evaluation: [B2]: Additional information needed on the results of the projects described and the State party’s role and actions concerning their implementation. [D1]: No information on measures taken to offer lasting solutions for displaced persons, including their voluntary and safe return. Summary of first reply – paragraph 20: No information on this paragraph. Evaluation: [D1] Summary of first reply – paragraph 32: A criminal circuit court is scheduled to rule on this case. “Additional information will be provided in the next report of Chad”. Evaluation: [B2]: The Committee takes note of the State party’s commitment to provide updated information on the measures taken to protect and assist Khadidja Ousmane Mahamat and to prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the violence. Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis. Next periodic report: 31 July 2012
Ninety-ninth session (July 2010)
State party: Estonia
COB: CCPR/C/EST/CO/3, adopted in July 2010 Follow-up paragraphs: Para. 5: mandate of Chancellor of Justice Para. 6: gender discrimination

GE.12-43178

17

CCPR/C/104/2*
First reply: Expected: 27 July 2011; Received: 12 August 2011
NGO Information:
5 October 2011 Legal Information Centre for Human Rights (LICHR) and the Centre for Civil and Political Rights (CCPR).
Evaluation:
Para. 5: [B1] Para. 6: [B2]17
Second reply: 20 January 2012
Summary of second reply – paragraph 5:
The Office of the Chancellor of Justice enjoys a broad mandate to protect and promote human rights and its activities comply with the conditions of the Paris Principles. Various avenues are being considered with regard to establishing a National Human Rights Institution accredited under the International Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights Institutions.
No specific information is provided on the areas of intervention of the Chancellor.
Evaluation:
[B2]: Updated information is necessary on the decisions taken, when made, to establish an NHRI.
Summary of second reply – paragraph 6:
Despite overall budgetary constraints, the budget for the Gender Equality and Equal Treatment Commissioner and its office in 2012 remained the same as in 2011. The Ministry of Social Affairs drafted an application for a programme financed by the Norwegian Financial Mechanism. The programme would provide 700,000 euros to the Gender Equality and Equal Treatment Commissioner from autumn 2012 until the end of 2015. The programme should be approved in summer 2012.
The Ministry of Social Affairs should start the negotiations for the creation of the Gender Equality Council in the first half of 2012. The proposal for composition of the Council should be submitted to the Government in 2012.
Evaluation:
[B2]: Updated information is necessary on the status of the application for the programme to be financed by the Norwegian Financial Mechanism, and on the outcome of the negotiations by the Ministry of Social Affairs on the creation of the Gender Equality Council, once finalized.
Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis.
Next periodic report: 30 July 2015

17 Letter sent: 29 November 2011: additional information requested on the stage of the accreditation process reached by the Office of the Chancellor of Justice; the areas of intervention of the Office (para. 5); additional action taken to improve the financial and human resources to enable the Gender Equality and Equal Treatment Commissioner to fulfil its functions in compliance with the Equal Treatment Act (para. 6).

18

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
State party: Colombia
COB: CCPR/C/COL/CO/6, adopted in July 2010
Follow-up paragraphs:
Para. 9: investigation and punishment of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
Para. 14: extrajudicial executions
Para. 16: intelligence service
State party’s first reply: Expected: 28 July 2011; Received: 8 August 2011
Summary of first reply – paragraph 9:
Substantial efforts have been made to conduct a process of reintegration, truth, justice and social reconstruction. The strategies to combat impunity that have been implemented with a view to strengthening institutional capacity to investigate serious human rights violations are described in the report. Colombia has not abstained from criminal prosecution. The armed conflict poses a challenge that requires the development of public policy strategies enabling national reconciliation.
Act No. 975, the Justice and Peace Act, has helped to stem impunity for illegal vigilante groups and allowed victims to actively participate in the process. Initially, the Justice and Peace Act did not achieve the desired results owing to the limits imposed by the interpretation of its provisions, whereby that law could not be applied and charges could not be brought until the Government had specified each and every one of the criminal acts in which a given individual had allegedly been involved. Now that partial charges are allowed, the Public Prosecution Service has charged 405 individuals with 28,432 offences, and many of those persons should soon be sentenced.
The evaluation of the justice and peace process must also take into account the reported victims, confessions, exhumations, identifications of victims, copies of the case files sent to the competent judicial authorities, general or specific information days on cases of enforced disappearance, biological samples taken for reference from more than 15,000 family members of disappeared persons, and the participation of victims in the process. The gene bank project coordinated by the Public Prosecution Service has been initiated.
The application of the principle of discretion to prosecute to demobilized members of an illegal armed group who have not been included by the Government in the justice and peace process has been declared unconstitutional. In order to resolve the legal situation of these demobilized persons, Act No. 1424 of 2010 was adopted in application of the extraordinary regulatory powers held by the President of the Republic. The Act establishes a non-judicial mechanism to promote truth and historical memory; that mechanism does not replace the criminal prosecution of offences.
Act No. 1448 of 2011 establishes all the effective remedies for victims of serious human rights violations and recognizes their right to quick and appropriate reparations.
Other actions have been taken to combat impunity: (i) the establishment of a national unit within the Public Prosecution Service to prosecute crimes of disappearance and forced displacement (November 2010); (ii) the creation of a database on sexual violence perpetrated during the conflict; (iii) the adoption of a coordination agreement between the Public Prosecution Service and the National Reparation and Reconciliation Commission.
NGO information – paragraph 9:

GE.12-43178

19

CCPR/C/104/2*

Colombian Commission of Jurists – Colombia-Europe-United States Coordination, 22 September 2011: The recommendation in paragraph 9 has not been implemented, given that: (1) the results of the application of Act No. 975 are not satisfactory; (2) subsequent laws (Act No. 132 of 2009 and Act No. 1424 of 2010) continue to violate the right of victims to truth, justice and reparation; (3) paramilitary groups continue to engage in their activities and to violate the rights of the civilian population, a fact which the Government does not recognize; (4) the Government makes proposals that tend to pave the way for new types of paramilitary groups (strengthening “citizen networks of support and solidarity” that encourage civilians to engage in activities that are the domain of law enforcement officials, thereby connecting surveillance services and private security with the national police force).
Evaluation:
[C1]: The Committee should recognize the State party’s efforts but maintain its concern about the limited results of Act No. 975 with regard to the current levels of impunity, the obstacles to the implementation of the legislative and regulatory provisions of Act No. 1424, and the resulting risks to victims’ access to justice, truth and reparation. Information should be requested on measures taken to ensure that current initiatives and ongoing reforms address the causes of impunity and find ways to resolve them.
Summary of first reply – paragraph 14:
The Ministry of Defence has not issued any policy directive or instruction that might encourage serious human rights violations or infringements of international humanitarian law. The comprehensive human rights policy of the Ministry guides the conduct of law enforcement officials. Measures and monitoring mechanisms have been introduced to prevent such misconduct and facilitate investigations. A committee has been established to follow up on complaints of killings of protected persons. A coordinating body has been set up to facilitate the resolution of conflicts of jurisdiction between the judicial authorities, the Ministry of Defence, the Public Prosecution Service and the Attorney-General’s Office. In 2010 and 2011, the military criminal justice system referred 346 cases to the ordinary courts.
Other measures adopted: (i) plan for conducting investigations within the military criminal justice system; (ii) protocol for recognizing cases of human rights violations and infringements of international humanitarian law, setting out standard criteria for investigations; (iii) analysis of the recent decisions of the Disciplinary Chamber on conflicts of jurisdiction; (iv) training for 90 members of the judiciary to prevent decisions rejecting the competence of the ordinary courts; (v) adoption of Act No. 1407 of 2010 limiting the jurisdiction of the military criminal justice system to offences committed in the performance of military duties and prohibiting it from hearing cases of torture, genocide, forced disappearance, crimes against humanity or infringements of international humanitarian law.
The Ministry of Defence continues to implement the 15 measures adopted to prevent the killing of protected persons, resulting in a drastic reduction of the number of complaints. A project was initiated in cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia to evaluate the 15 measures.
In June 2011, the Ministry of Defence adopted 15 measures to combat impunity, which are described in the report.
NGO information – paragraph 14:
Extrajudicial executions directly attributable to law enforcement officials are still carried out. Ministry of Defence directives that could lead to serious human rights violations are still in force. The measures taken by the State party do not guarantee the independence of

20

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
investigations and do not reinforce the actions of the Public Prosecution Service and the Attorney-General’s Office. The actions of the Military Defence Service (DEMIL) unnecessarily draw out judicial proceedings, hindering the work of prosecutors and judges.
There are no measures in place to protect members of the judiciary or the representatives or family members of victims of human rights violations. There are still 11 units of the Public Prosecution Service housed in military facilities, thus compromising the impartiality of the investigations.
Extrajudicial executions still often go unpunished. The State has not provided clear information on the conflicts of jurisdiction between the military criminal courts and the ordinary criminal courts.
Evaluation:
[B2]: Progress can be seen but remains fragile. The Committee should express its concern regarding the discussions currently under way in Congress to establish a presumption of jurisdiction for the military justice system to investigate cases involving members of the Armed Forces and the police. The general rule should be that jurisdiction belongs to the ordinary criminal justice system. Information should be requested on measures taken to avoid such a setback.
[D1]: No information is provided on measures taken to ensure the safety of witnesses and loved ones in such cases.
Summary of first reply – paragraph 16:
In November 2010 the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the Act on Intelligence Archives and its regulations. In the light of the lack of a legal framework and the need to ensure that the problems encountered are not repeated, the Department of National Security (DAS) has adopted a series of measures as described in the report. Internal and external monitoring mechanisms have been introduced to monitor the activities of the intelligence service, and there are plans to set up a purging committee.
A bill establishing a new intelligence agency was adopted in May 2011 (Act No. 1444) and sets a six-month deadline for the President of the Republic to create, eliminate, split and merge the various intelligence departments. Investigations have been carried out within DAS, and a staff purging process has begun.
The Supreme Court prosecutor is investigating illegal surveillance activities and wiretapping committed by some DAS members against social and human rights organizations. Significant progress has been made in these cases, as reflected in the sentences handed down and the measures adopted. The results achieved by the Public Prosecution Service indicate that the judiciary is working effectively to obtain appropriate sentences for those responsible, while ensuring the victims’ participation.
NGO information – paragraph 16:
No decision has been taken under Act No. 1444 to reform DAS. Act No. 1444 sets out a general framework for intelligence activities and introduces provisions that do not respect fundamental rights and do not offer any effective remedy to ensure these can be exercised and defended (it places excessive restrictions on access to intelligence documents, makes no provision for any monitoring mechanism, and limits the scope of the Parliamentary Legal Committee established under the 2009 Act). The bill mentions establishing a commission to sort archives for two years, with very limited functions. The Commission should be permanent and its recommendations should give rise to permanent and mandatory regulations. The Government has announced that the purging of archives will not begin until a specific legal framework has been adopted.

GE.12-43178

21

CCPR/C/104/2*
Only three sentences were handed down in the cases the State party mentioned (these were plea bargains reached when the accused accepted responsibility). The prosecution was suspended in other cases because the accused agreed to testify.
Complaints have been filed against several DAS and Government officials and former officials, including Mr. Uribe, former President of the Republic, who admitted his responsibility for the conduct of public officials under investigation.
New cases of illegal intelligence activities involving the surveillance of judges, politicians, journalists and human rights defenders are mentioned. A legal framework for the effective and independent monitoring of intelligence activities should be established in consultation with the social organizations victimized by the current strategies.
Evaluation:
[B2]: Progress has been achieved in the form of the investigation and resolution of cases involving illegal intelligence activities, the official closure of DAS in October 2011, and the establishment of the National Directorate of Intelligence. The Committee should express its concern that illegal intelligence activities are still being brought to its attention. Additional information should be requested on measures taken to regulate the military intelligence service and on the sorting of intelligence archives.
Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis.
Next periodic report: 1 April 2014

100th session (October 2010)

State party: Belgium
COB: CCPR/C/BEL/CO/5, adopted in October 2010
Follow-up paragraphs:
Para. 14: use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials
Para. 17: access to legal counsel and a doctor within the first few hours of detention
Para. 21: deportation of foreign nationals; independence of oversight bodies
State party’s first reply: Expected: 26 October 2011; Received: 18 November 2011
Summary of first reply – paragraph 14:
The legal requirements for the use of force by police officers are outlined. Statistics are provided on internal and external monitoring, on the number of disciplinary sanctions handed down by the competent authorities, on the judicial investigations carried out by the Police Investigation Service, and on the criminal convictions handed down for acts of “police violence”.
An investigation into the complaints lodged in the wake of the events of 29 September to 1 October 2010 was opened by the Police Investigation Service and closed in early June 2011. The recommendations contained in the final report (appended to the reply) were sent to the Minister of the Interior and the police services concerned.
Evaluation:
[B1]: Reply limited to the provisions already in place before the concluding observations were adopted. No mention of new measures to improve the situation, or of the United

22

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*
Nations Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials. Additional information is needed on measures taken to improve the situation regarding the use of force by police officers, to ensure that investigations are systematically conducted in cases of complaints alleging ill-treatment, and to prosecute and punish those responsible in proportion to the seriousness of their actions (para. 14).
[A]: Regarding the complaints lodged in the wake of the demonstrations held from 29 September to 1 October 2010.
Summary of first reply – paragraph 17:
The Act amending both the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Act of 20 July 1990 was passed in August 2011. It incorporates the principles found in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights (Salduz v. Turkey) and several recommendations made by the United Nations and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. On 23 September 2011, the Association of Prosecutors-General issued a circular (annexed to the reply) on arranging for a lawyer’s assistance from the time of the first hearing.
Evaluation:
[B2]: The legislative amendments adopted rectify the problems concerning access to a lawyer within the first few hours after a person is deprived of his or her liberty and the right of access to a doctor. Additional information is needed on measures taken to ensure that the monitoring of deportations of foreign nationals is independent and objective, to implement the legislation on access to a lawyer and a doctor within the first few hours after a person is deprived of his or her liberty and to ensure that the changes made will be definitive.
Summary of first reply – paragraph 21:
Information on increased monitoring and on the mandate of the General Inspectorate of the Federal and Local Police.
Evaluation:
[B1]: There is no guarantee that the reform will continue beyond 2013. Information is needed on measures taken to maintain the level of operational monitoring when the European Commission project ends.
[A]: On the independence of the oversight body.
Recommended action: Letter reflecting the Committee’s analysis.
Next periodic report: 31 October 2015

GE.12-43178

23

CCPR/C/104/2*

Annex

87th session: July 2006

Central African Republic (second report) CCPR/C/CAF/CO/2 §§ 11, 12, 13

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report:

2007-07-27 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: new 2010-08-01 NOT SUBMITTED periodic report due - no reply received
from SP

LOIPR status

NOT APPLICABLE

History of the procedure

28/09/2007- [HRC] Reminders sent 10/12/2007 20/02/2008 [HRC] Request for SP meeting 18/03/2008 [HRC] Request for SP meeting 01/04/2008 [MEET] Meeting during 92
session 11/06/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 22/09/2008
16/12/2008 [HRC] Request for SP meeting 29/05/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent 02/02/2010- [HRC] Request for SP meeting 25/06/2010 and reminder
28/09/2010 [HRC] SP invited to reply to all COB in next periodic report

No responses provided.

13/10/2010 [MEET] Meeting during 100th session.

No reply received.

Recommended Action: NONE

USA (second & third report) CCPR/C/USA/CO/3/Rev.1 §§ 12, 13, 14, 16, 20, 26

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 28/09/2007 [HRC] Reminder sent 01/11/2007 [SP] FU report

27/07/2007 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

01/08/2010 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

§12

incomplete

[B2]

§13

incomplete

[B2]

§14

incomplete

[B2]

§16

incomplete

[B2]

§20

complete

[A]

§26

incomplete

[B2]

24

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

11/06/2008 [HRC] Request for SP meeting

10/07/2008 [MEET] Meeting during 93rd session

06/05/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent

15/07/2009 [SP] FU report

§12

satisfactory in parts.

[B2]

§13

satisfactory in parts.

[B2]

§14

incomplete

[B2]

§16

incomplete

[B2]

§26

incomplete

[B2]

26/04/2010 [HRC] SP invited to reply to all Recommended Action: NONE COB in next periodic report

UNMIK CCPR/C/UNK/CO/1 §§ 12, 13, 18

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

27/07/2007 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

Due date for the next periodic report:

01/08/2010 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

NOT APPLICABLE

History of the procedure

Apr. - Sept. [HRC] Reminders sent (3) 2007

10/12/2007 [HRC] Request for SP meeting

11/03/2008 [SP] FU report

§12

incomplete

[B2]

§13

incomplete

[B2]

§18

incomplete

[B2]

11/06/2008 [HRC] Request for SP meeting

22/07/2008 [MEET] Meeting during XX session

Additional info provided - incomplete

N/A

07/11/2008 [SP] FU report

§12

incomplete

[B2]

§13

incomplete

[B2]

§18

incomplete

[B2]

03/06/2009 [HRC] Add. info requested

03/06/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent

12/11/2009 [SP] FU report

§12

partially implemented

[B2]

§13

partially implemented

[B2]

§18

partially implemented

[B2]

28/09/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent

10/05/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent & Request for meeting

20/07/2011 [MEET] Meeting during 102 session.

Agreement: UNMIK will send additional information before the October 2011 session.

09/09/2011 [SP] FU report 10/12/2011 [HRC] Letter sent to UNMIK.

taking note of the Mission’s inability to implement the recommendations of the Committee and of its commitment to coordinate the elaboration of a consolidated report.

GE.12-43178

25

CCPR/C/104/2*

22/12/2011 [HRC] Letter to OLA (Mrs. O’Brien)

Requesting advice on the general status of Kosovo and on the strategy to adopt in the future to maintain the dialogue of the Committee with Kosovo.

13/02/2012 [UNMIK] Reply

Recommended action: ANALYSE UNMIK’S REPLY AT NEXT SESSION

HONDURAS CCPR/C/HND/2005/1 §§ 9, 10, 11, 19

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 07/01/2007 [SP] FU report 20/01/2007 [HRC] Add. info requested 01/01/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 11/06/2008 22/09/2008 [HRC] Request for meeting 15/10/2008 [SP] FU report
10/12/2008 [HRC] Letter sent 06/05/2009- [HRC] Reminder sent 27/08/2009 02/02/2010- [HRC] Request for SP meeting 28/09/2010 and reminder

27/10/2007 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

31/10/2010 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

Answer not relevant to recommendations [C2]

Initial actions taken - Implementation still [B2] pending
Add. info requested on all paragraphs

Oct. 2010 [EXT] CCPR (CPTRT) 21/10/2010 [MEET] Meeting during 100th
session.
16/12/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

§10 Progress made but additional action required [B2]
Invitation to reply to COB as a whole in next periodic report.

Recommended Action: NONE

Bosnia and Herzegovina (initial report) CCPR/C/BIH/CO/1 §§ 8, 14, 19, 23

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 21/12/2007 [SP] FU report
17/01/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent 22/09/2008 [HRC] Request for meeting Oct. 2008 [EXT] CCPR (Helsinki
Committee) 31/10/2008 [MEET] Meeting during 94th
session 01/11/2008 [SP] FU report

01/11/2007 SUBMITTED 01/11/2010 SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE

§§ 8, 14, 19, 23

All incomplete

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New report due
[B2]

§§ 8, 14, 19, 23

Reply to be submitted after government approval.

§§ 8, 14, All incomplete

[B2]

19, 23

26

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

04/03/2009 [SP] FU report

§§ 8, 14, All incomplete

[B2]

19, 23

29/05/2009 [HRC] Letter sent

Add. info requested on all paragraphs

27/08/2009- [HRC] Reminders sent 11/12/2009

14/12/2009 [SP] FU report

§8

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§14

Partially satisfactory

[B2]

§19

Partially satisfactory

[B2]

§23

Cooperative but incomplete

[B2]

11/12/2009 [HRC] Invitation to reply to COB as a whole in next periodic report

Sept. 2010 [EXT] TRIAL

§14

Progress made but additional action required

Recommended Action: NONE

Ukraine (sixth report) CCPR/C/BIH/CO/6 §§ 7, 11, 14, 16

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 17/01/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent 19/05/2008 [SP] FU report

06/05/2008 Oct. 2008

[HRC] Add. info requested
[EXT] CCPR (UHHRU, International Renaissance Foundation, Donetsk, Vinnytsya Human Rights protection group, Kharkiv Human Rights Group)

02/11/2007 SUBMITTED 02/11/2011 SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE

§§ 7, 11, 14, 16

All incomplete

§§ 7, 11, 14, 16

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New report due
[B2]

06/05/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent 28/08/2009 [SP] FU report
26/04/2010 [HRC] Letter sent
28/09/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 19/04/2011 10/05/2011- [HRC] Requests for meeting 02/08/2011

§7

Part incomplete, part unimplemented

[B2]

§11

Part satisfactory, part incomplete

[B2]

§14

Incomplete

[B2]

§16

Part satisfactory, part incomplete

[B2]

Requesting supplementary information and underlining unimplemented recommendations

No reply Recommended Action: NONE

Republic of Korea (third report) CCPR/C/KOR/CO/3 §§ 12, 13, 18

GE.12-43178

27

CCPR/C/104/2*

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 17/01/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent 25/02/2008 [SP] FU report
11/06/2008 [HRC] Request for meeting 21/07/2008 [MEET] Meeting during 93rd
session 22/07/2008 [HRC] Letter summarizing
outstanding issues sent 06/05/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 27/08/2009

02/11/2007 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

02/11/2010 NOT SUBMITTED report due - No reply received from SP

NOT APPLICABLE

§12

Incomplete

[B2]

§13

Incomplete

[B2]

§18

Unsatisfactory

[B2]

Add. Info to be provided in next periodic report

Recommended Action: NONE

89th session: March 2007

Madagascar (third report) CCPR/C/MDG/CO/3 §§ 7, 24, 25

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 11/06/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 22/09/2008

23/03/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

23/03/2011 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

16/12/2008 [HRC] Request for meeting

03/03/2009 [SP] FU report

§7

Incomplete

[B2]

§24

Incomplete

[B2]

§25

Incomplete

[B2]

29/05/2009 [HRC] Letter sent

Add. info requested on all paragraphs

03/09/2009- [HRC] Reminders sent 10/05/2011

25/06/2010 [HRC] Request for meeting

28/09/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 10/05/2011

17/05/2011 [SP] FU report (dated 2010-0929)

Recommended Action: The follow-up replies should be included in the analysis of the next periodic report

Chile (fifth report) CCPR/C/CHL/CO/5 §§ 9, 19

Status

28

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 11/06/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 22/09/2008

26/03/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

21/10/2008 [SP] FU report 31/10/2008

§9

Incomplete on certain issues

[B2]

§19

Incomplete on certain issues

[B2]

10/12/2008 [HRC] Add. info requested

25/03/2009

[EXT] CCPR (Centro de Derechos Humanos, Universidad Diego Portales; Observatorio de Derechos de los Pueblos Indígenas)

§§9, 19

22/06/2009 [HRC] Request for meeting 28/07/2009 [MEET] Meeting.

Part incomplete, part unimplemented Add. info in preparation to be sent ASAP.

11/12/2009- [HRC] Reminders sent 23/04/2010 28/05/2010 [SP] FU report
16/12/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

§9

Incomplete on certain issues

[B2]

§19

Incomplete on certain issues

[B2]

Specifying add. info needed and which recommendations had not been adequately implemented

31/01/2011 [SP] Letter requesting clarifications on the add. info requested.

20/04/2011 [HRC] Letter clarifying the add. info requested

05/10/2011 [SP] FU report

§9

No information on the prohibition to exercise public functions for persons responsible for HR violations

[D1] and [B1]

§19

FU discontinued on the issue

[A]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

Barbados (third report) CCPR/C/BRB/CO/3 §§ 9, 12, 13

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 11/06/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 22/09/2008

29/03/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

29/03/2011 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

16/12/2008 [HRC] Request for meeting
19/03/2009 [EXT] CCPR (BONGO; GIEACPC; IGLHRC)

§§ 9, 12, 13

GE.12-43178

29

CCPR/C/104/2*

31/03/2009 [SP] Meeting during 95th session. Partial reply received.
29/07/2009 [HRC] Letter sent 23/04/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 28/09/2010 10/05/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

§9

Part largely satisfactory, part not

[B1]

implemented

§12

Not implemented

[C1]

§13

Incomplete and not implemented

[C1]

Add. info requested on all paragraphs

Inviting SP to include requested additional information in next periodic report.
Recommended Action: NONE

90th session: July 2007

Zambia (third report) CCPR/C/ZMB/CO/3 §§ 10, 12, 13, 23

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure Sep. 2008 - [HRC] Reminders sent (3) May 2009 07/10/2009 [HRC] Request for meeting 28/10/2009 [MEET] Meeting. 09/12/2009 [SP] FU report

25/01/2010
26/04/2010 28/09/2010 28/01/2011

[EXT] CCPR (AWOMI; WILDAF; ZCEA) [HRC] Letter sent [HRC] Reminder sent [SP] FU report

20/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

20/07/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

20/07/2011 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

Reply in preparation to be sent ASAP.

§10

No reply

[D1]

§12

Incomplete

[B2]

§13

Incomplete

[B2]

§23

Incomplete

[B2]

§§ 10, 12, 13, 23

Add. info requested on all paragraphs

§10

Implementation partially initiated (10a) [B2]

§12

Further action required

[B2]

§13

Further action required

[B2]

§23

Implementation partially initiated (23b) [B2]

Inviting SP to include requested additional information in next periodic report.

Sudan (third report) CCPR/C/SDN/CO/3
Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status

Recommended Action: NONE §§ 9, 11, 17

26/07/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

26/07/2010 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

30

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

History of the procedure 22/09/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 19/12/2008
22/06/2009- [HRC] Requests for meeting 19/10/2009 19/10/2009 [SP] FU report. Annexes have
not been received.
19/10/2009 [HRC] Note verbale requiring the annexes
26/02/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§11

Incomplete

[B2]

§17

Incomplete

[B2]

Inviting SP to include requested additional information in next periodic report.

Recommended action: NONE

Czech Republic (second report) CCPR/C/CZE/CO/2 §§ 9, 14, 16

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

Due date for the next periodic report:

LOIPR status

History of the procedure

June 2008

[EXT] CCPR (Zvule Prava; Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions; European Roma Rights Centre; Peacework Development Fund)

25/07/2008 SUBMITTED 01/08/2011 SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE
§16

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New report due

11/06/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent 18/08/2008 [SP] FU report
10/12/2008 [HRC] Add. info requested. 06/05/2009- [HRC] Reminders sent 06/10/2009 Feb. 2010 [HRC] Request for meeting 22/03/2010 [SP] FU report 01/07/2010
20/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§14

Incomplete

[B2]

§16

Incomplete

[B2]

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§14

Incomplete

[B2]

§16

Incomplete

[B2]

Considering info satisfactory on 9c, 14a, 14c, 16c, 16d, 16f. Incomplete on 9a, 9b, 16e. 14b not implemented.

25/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Stating that the requested info should be included in the next periodic report

Recommended action: NONE

GE.12-43178

31

CCPR/C/104/2*

91st session: October 2007

Georgia (third report) CCPR/C/GEO/CO/3 §§ 8, 9, 11

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 16/12/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent 13/01/2009 [SP] FU report
29/05/2009 [HRC] Add. info requested. 27/08/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent 28/10/2009 [SP] FU report
28/09/2010 [HRC] Add. info requested. 20/04/2011- [HRC] Reminder sent 02/08/2011

26/10/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

01/11/2011 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

§8

Incomplete

[B2]

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§11

Incomplete

[B2]

§8

Incomplete

[B2]

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§11

Incomplete

[B2]

24/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Stating that the requested info should be included in the next periodic report

Recommended Action: NONE

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (fourth report) CCPR/C/LBY/CO/4 §§ 10, 21, 23

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 30/10/2008 [EXT] Alkarama for Human
Rights 16/12/2008- [HRC] Reminders sent 09/06/2009 24/07/2009 [SP] FU report
23/04/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent and request for meeting.
28/09/2010 [HRC] Request for meeting 12/10/2010 [MEET] Meeting during 100th
session 18/11/2010 [SP] Confirmation letter of
outcome of above meeting

30/10/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

30/10/2010 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

§§ 21, 23

§10

Part implemented, part incomplete

[B2]

§21

Part implemented, part incomplete

[B2]

§23

Part implemented, part incomplete

[B2]

Commitment to communicate Committee’s request to the Government

32

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

05/11/2010 [SP] FU report (hard copy) received
18/11/2010 [HRC] Request for FU report in word format
10/05/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent that periodic report was five months overdue

Recommended Action: NONE Austria (fourth report) CCPR/C/AUT/CO/4 §§ 11, 12, 16, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 15/10/2008 [SP] FU report
12/12/2008 [HRC] Add. info requested. 29/05/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent 28/10/2009 [SP] FU report
23/07/2009 [EXT] CCPR (asylkoordination Österreich; Integrationshaus; SOS Mitmensch)

30/10/2008 SUBMITTED 30/10/2012 NOT SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE

§11

Incomplete

§12

Incomplete

§16

Incomplete

§17

Incomplete

§11

Largely satisfactory

§12

Largely satisfactory

§16

Largely satisfactory

§17

Largely satisfactory

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: Answers largely satisfactory
[B2] [B2] [B2] [B2]
[A] [A] [A] [A]

14/12/2009 [HRC] Letter sent

Stating FU procedure considered completed. Recommended Action: NONE

Algeria (third report) CCPR/C/DZA/CO/3 §§ 11, 12, 15

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 07/11/2007 [SP] FU report
30/10/2008 [EXT] Algeria-Watch 05/11/2008 [EXT] Alkarama for Human
Rights 16/12/2008 [HRC] Reminder sent

01/11/2008 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New

01/11/2011 NOT SUBMITTED report due

NOT APPLICABLE

§11

Partial

[B2]

§12

Partial

[B2]

§15

Partial

[B2]

§§11, 12

§§11, 12, 15

GE.12-43178

33

CCPR/C/104/2*

2009-01-14 [SP] Letter 2009-10-12

Repeating position of memorandum, requesting memo to be issued as annex to annual report

25/06/2010 [HRC] Request for meeting

27/07/2010 [SP] Communication that SP representatives were available for the 99th session

28/07/2010 [HRC] Request for meeting

11/10/2010 [MEET] Meeting during 100th session

Request transmitted to Government. No reply received.

16/12/2010 [HRC] Invited SP to reply to COB in next periodic report

Recommended Action: NONE

92nd session: March 2008

Tunisia (fifth report) CCPR/C/TUN/CO/5 Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 07/11/2007 [SP] FU report
11/03/2009 [EXT] Alkarama for Human Rights
23/07/2009 [EXT] CCPR/FIDH (CNLT; LTDH)
30/07/2009 [HRC] Letter sent

§§ 11, 14, 20, 21

28/03/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

§11

Cooperation but incomplete

[B2]

§14

Not implemented

[C1]

§20

Acknowledged but imprecise info

[B2]

§21

Acknowledged but imprecise info

[B2]

§§11, 20

§§11, 14, 20, 21
Add. info requested. Some issues not to be considered in the FU process, but should be dealt with in the next periodic report.

Aug. 2009 [EXT] OMCT

§§ 11, 14, 20, 21

02/03/2010 [SP] FU report

04/10/2010 [HRC] Letter noting issues on which FU discontinued and specifying requested info.

20/04/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent informing that the next periodic report is due 2012-03-31.

20/09/2011 [SP] Letter

Asking to postpone the examination of Tunisia due to the January 2011 revolution.

21/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Acknowledging SP’s request and informing that the next periodic report is now due on 31 March 2014. FU reply remains pending and should be sent within a year.

34

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

08/12/2011 [SP] Letter confirming that the Recommended Action: NONE SP periodic report will be sent by 31/3/2014

Botswana (initial report) CCPR/C/BWA/CO/1 §§ 12, 13, 14, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 08/09/2009- [HRC] Reminder sent 11/12/2009

28/03/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

28/09/2010- [HRC] Request for meeting 19/04/2011

06/07/2011 [SP] Positive response for meeting (via telephone)
27/07/2011 [MEET] Meeting with Ambassador.
05/10/2011 [SP] FU report
24/11/2011 [HR] Letter sent

Info to be sent before the October session 2011.

§12

Incomplete

[B2]

§13

Incomplete and not implemented

[B2] and [D1]

§14

Not implemented

[D1]

§17

Incomplete

[B2]

Requesting additional info in next periodic report on para. 12, 13, 17, and stating that part of 13 and 14 have not been implemented.

Recommended Action: NONE

Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (second report) CCPR/C/MKD/CO/2 §§ 12, 14, 15

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 23/07/2009 [EXT] CCPR (Helsinki
Committee) 27/08/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent 31/08/2009 [SP] FU report
26/04/2010 [HRC]Letter sent 28/09/2011- [HRC] Reminders sent 20/04/2011 04/06/2011 [SP] FU report 19/09/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

03/04/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

§§12, 14, 15

§12

Incomplete

[B2]

§14

Part unimplemented, part no reply

[C1]

§15

Incomplete

[B2]

Requesting additional info on all paragraphs

Requesting additional info. (paras. 15 and 12) and on 14 in next periodic report and stating that no info was provided on part. of para 12.

GE.12-43178

35

CCPR/C/104/2*

Recommended Action: NONE

Panama (third report) CCPR/C/PAN/CO/3 §§ 11, 14, 18

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

03/04/2009 NOT SUBMITTED

Due date for the next periodic report:

01/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

NOT APPLICABLE

History of the procedure

27/08/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent

11/12/2009 [HRC] Reminder sent

23/04/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent

28/09/2010 [HRC] Request for meeting

19/04/2011 [HRC] Request for meeting

June-July 2011

[HRC] Four calls to the Perm. Mission but unable to confirm SP meeting.

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

19/10/2011 [HRC] Phone call to PM 26/10/2011 [MEET] Meeting.

Recalling the request for a meeting. Said they will consult with the Representative and reply to the request.
The ambassador, Mr. Navarro, indicated that the info will be provided by the PM in the forthcoming weeks.

93rd session: July 2008

Recommended Action: REMINDER

France (fourth report) CCPR/C/FRA/CO/4 §§ 12, 18, 20

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 20/07/2009 [SP] FU report
11/01/2010 [HRC] Add. info requested. 09/07/2010 [SP] FU report
16/12/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

22/07/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

§12

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§18

Part incomplete

[B2]

§20

Part incomplete

[B2]

§12

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§18

Part incomplete

[B2]

§20

Part incomplete

[B2]

Specifying 12 as complete, add. info requested for certain issues on 18, 20

17/01/2011 [SP] Clarifications requested by the SP on the request for add. info.
20/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent specifying the add. info

36

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent 08/11/2011 [SP] FU report

§18

Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B2]

§20

Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B1]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS.

San Marino (second report) CCPR/C/SMR/CO/2 §§ 6, 7

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 31/07/2009 [SP] FU report
09/05/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

22/07/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED:

31/07/2013 NOT SUBMITTED Answers largely satisfactory

ACCEPTED: Adopted Oct. 2011

§6

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§7

Largely satisfactory

[A]

Stating that replies are sufficient to consider the FU procedure completed.

Recommended Action: NONE

Ireland (third report) CCPR/C/IRL/CO/3 §§ 11, 15, 22

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 31/07/2009 [SP] FU report
Aug. 2009 [EXT] FLAC; ICCL; IPRT
04/01/2010 [HRC] Request add. info on 11. FU procedure on 15, 22 considered completed

23/07/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

§11

Incomplete

[B2]

§15

Incomplete and not implemented

[B2]

§22

Incomplete

[B2]

§§11, 15, 22

21/12/2010 [SP] FU report

§11

Incomplete

[B2]

25/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent requesting add. info on parts of 11.

02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminders sent 17/11/2011

31/01/2012 [SP] Reply

§11

Satisfactory. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[A]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (sixth report) CCPR/C/GBR/CO/6 §§ 9, 12, 14, 15

Status

GE.12-43178

37

CCPR/C/104/2*

Due date for the follow-up report:

22/07/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

Due date for the next periodic report:

31/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

NOT APPLICABLE

History of the procedure

Aug. 2009 [EXT] British Irish Rights Watch §§ 3-4, 611, 13-18, 24-39

07/08/2009 [SP] FU report

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§12

Parts not replied to

[B2]

§14

Part implemented, but incomplete

[B2]

§15

Part incomplete

[B2]

24/08/2009 [EXT] Northern Ireland Human §9 Rights Commission

26/04/2010 [HRC] Request for add. info on 9, 14, 15

28/09/2010 [HRC] Reminder combined with request for add. info on 12

10/11/2010 [SP] FU report

§§ 9, 12 Largely satisfactory

[A]

§§ 14, 15 Incomplete, add. info required

[B2]

20/04/2011 [HRC] Request for add. info on 14, 15

02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent

19/10/2011 [SP] FU report

§14

Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B1]

§15

Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B1]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

94th session: October 2008

Nicaragua (third report) CCPR/C/NIC/CO/3 §§ 12, 13, 17, 19

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

209-10-29 SUBMITTED

Due date for the next periodic report:

29/10/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

NOT APPLICABLE

History of the procedure

23/04/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 08/10/2010

20/04/2011 [HRC] Request for meeting

04/05/2011 [SP] Positive response for meeting (via telephone). Meeting set to 2011-07-18, but no representative showed up.

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

38

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent expressing regret that no representative showed up and requesting new meeting.
11/10/2011 [SP] FU report and note verbale explaining and apologizing for their absence at the July meeting.

10/02/2012 [EXT] CENIDH, OMCT, la Red de Centros, la Red de Mujeres contra la violencia, CODENI

§12 d, e Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§12 a, b, c No info provided

§13

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B1] [D1] [B1] [C1] [D1]

§17

Reply does not provide the information [C2]

requested. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§19

Incomplete. See CCPR.C.104.R.1

[B2]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

Monaco (second report) CCPR/CMCO/CO/2 § 9

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 26/03/2010 [SP] FU report 08/10/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

28/10/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED:

28/10/2013 NOT SUBMITTED Answers largely satisfactory

ACCEPTED: Adopted Oct. 2011

§6

Largely satisfactory

[A]

Stating FU process completed and inviting SP to keep Ctte informed on developments of specific forms of violence + training of judges and officials.

Recommended Action: NONE

Denmark (fifth report) CCPR/C/DNK/CO/5 §§ 8, 11

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 04/11/2009 [SP] FU report
201-01-28 [EXT] CCPR (The Danish Institute for Human Rights)
26/04/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

28/10/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED:

31/10/2013 NOT SUBMITTED Answers largely satisfactory

ACCEPTED: Adopted Oct. 2011

§8

Incomplete

[B2]

§11

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§11

Stating FU procedure complete for 11, request add. info on 8.

GE.12-43178

39

CCPR/C/104/2*

28/09/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 20/04/2011
05/08/2011 [SP] FU report 22/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent.

§8

Largely satisfactory

[A]

Informing that the FU procedure has come to an end and taking note of the SP acceptance of the LOIPR procedure.

Recommended action: NONE

Japan (fifth report) CCPR/C/JAP/CO/5 §§ 17, 18, 19, 21

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

Due date for the next periodic report:

LOIPR status

History of the procedure

01/12/2009

[EXT] JWCHR; JLAF; KYUENKAI; League Demanding State Compensation for the Victims of the Public Order Maintenance Law

29/10/2009 SUBMITTED 29/10/2011 NOT SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE
§§19, 21

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: New report due

21/12/2009 [SP] FU report
22/01/2010 [EXT] Japan Federation of Bar Associations
28/09/2010 [HRC]Letter sent

§17

Part unimplemented, part incomplete

[B2]

§18

Incomplete

[B2]

§19

Part implemented

[B2]

§21

Part unimplemented, part satisfactory

[B1]

§§17, 18, 19, 21

Add. info necessary on 17,18,19, and specifying parts unimplemented in 17,19,21

28/11/2011 [HRC] letter sent.

Stating that FU procedure has come to an end, and that the requested FU info should be included in the next periodic report due since 29/10/2011.

Recommended Action: NONE

Spain (fifth report) CCPR/C/ESP/CO/5 §§ 13, 15, 16

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 04/02/2010 [EXT] CCPR (BEHATOKIA)
23/04/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent 16/06/2010 [SP] FU report
25/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

30/10/2009 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/11/2012 NOT SUBMITTED

NOT APPLICABLE

§§11, 13, 14, 15, 19

§13

Implementation not completed

[B2]

§15

Implementation not completed

[B2]

§16

Implementation not completed

[B2]

Noting the initial implementation of 16 and requesting add. info on 13, 15.

40

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

29/06/2011 [SP] Reply with add. info on §§ 13, 15, 16
22/09/2011 [HRC] Letter sent.

Requesting updated info to be included in next periodic report on progresses realized on para. 16; and additional info on 13; and stating that para. 15 not implemented.

24/10/2011 [SP] FU report

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§13

Incomplete.

[B2]

§15

No information provided

[D1]

§16

Up dated information should be provided in [B1]

the next periodic report.

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

95th session: March 2009

Australia (fifth report) CCPR/C/AUS/CO/5 §§ 11, 14, 17, 23

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 20/11/2009 [EXT] Human Rights Law
Resources Centre Ltd
28/09/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent 17/12/2010 [SP] FU report
19/10/2011 [HRC] Letter sent requesting additional info on the implementation of 11, 14, 17
03/02/2012 [SP] FU reply

02/04/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

ACCEPTED

§§9-15, 1721, 23, 25, 27

§11

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§14

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§17

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§23

Implementation begun but not completed [A]

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§11

Not implemented

[C1]

§14

Incomplete

[B1]

§17

Incomplete

[B1]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

Rwanda (third report) CCPR/C/RWA/CO/3 §§ 12, 13, 14, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report:

02/04/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

GE.12-43178

41

CCPR/C/104/2*

LOIPR status
History of the procedure 28/09/2010 [HRC] Reminder sent 21/12/2010 [SP] FU report 25/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent 19/10/2011 [HRC] English translation of
letter previously sent in French (after request from SP)

UNDECIDED Requesting additional info on 12, 13, 14, 17

Recommended action: REMINDER

Sweden (sixth report) CCPR/C/SWE/CO/6 §§ 10, 13, 16, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 18/03/2010 [SP] FU report
28/09/2010 [HRC] Letter sent

02/04/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED

01/04/2014 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

§10

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§13

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§16

Incomplete

[B2]

§17

Part implemented, part without response [B2]

Stating that FU procedure is completed for 10, 13, requesting add. info for 13,17, highlight that 17 is not implemented.

24/10/2010 [EXT] CCPR (Swedish Disability Federation)
20/04/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent 05/08/2011 [SP] FU report 27/11/2011 [HR] Letter sent.

§17

Largely satisfactory

[A]

Stating that the answers provided are largely satisfactory and the FU procedure has come to an end.

Recommended action: NONE

96th session: July 2009

United Republic of Tanzania (third report) CCPR/C/RWA/CO/3 §§ 12, 13, 14, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 16/12/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 20/04/2011

28/07/2010 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 01/08/2013 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

02/08/2011 [HRC] Request for meeting 19/10/2011 [HRC] Phone call to PM

Asking for reply to the request for a meeting. Said they would consult with the Representative, but that the person in charge of HR issues is away until the end of November.

42

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

17/11/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent 21/02/2012 [HRC] Phone call to PM

Checking on option for meeting. All correspondence sent back to the PM at their request. No reply.
Recommended action: REMINDER

Kingdom of the Netherlands (fourth report) CCPR/C/NLD/CO/4 §§ 7, 9, 23

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 16/12/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 20/04/2011 20/07/2011 [SP] Phone call of Perm.
Mission. 16/09/2011 [SP] FU report
21/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent.

28/07/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/07/2014 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

Reply should be sent before Oct. 2011 session.

§7

Not implemented

[C1]

§9

Partially satisfactory

[B2]

§23

Partially satisfactory

[B2]

Requesting additional info on para.9 and part of 23; updated info on part of para. 23; and stating that para.7 has not been implemented.

Recommended action: REMINDER

Chad (initial report) CCPR/C/TCD/CO/1
Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 16/12/2010- [HRC] Reminders sent 20/04/2010 02/08/2011 [HRC] Request for meeting 19/10/2011 [HRC] Phone call to the
Permanent Mission 27/10/2011 [MEET] Meeting with SP

§§ 12, 13, 14, 17
29/07/2010 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 31/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE
Recalling the request for a meeting. Said they will consult with the Representative and reply to the request. The First Secretary, Mr. Awada, informed that he will insist to get the reply from Chad as soon as possible.

25/01/2012 [SP] FU report

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§10

Incomplete and not implemented

[B2] - [D1]

§13

Incomplete and not implemented

[B2] - [D1]

§20

No information provided

[D1]

§32

Incomplete

[B2]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

GE.12-43178

43

CCPR/C/104/2*

Azerbaijan (third report) CCPR/C/AZE/CO/4 §§ 9, 11, 15, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 06/07/2010 [SP] FU report (sent to
translation and received in June 2011)

30/07/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/08/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

REFUSED

§9

Add. info necessary

[B2]

§11

Add. info necessary

[B2]

§15

Add. info necessary

[B2]

§18

Add. info necessary

[B2]

30/10/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Requesting additional information on all paragraphs.

Recommended action: REMINDER

97th session: October 2009

Switzerland (third report) CCPR/C/CHE/CO/3 §§ 10, 14, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 01/11/2010 [SP] FU report 22/02/2011 [EXT] Humanrights.ch/MERS;
Schweizerische Flüchtlingshilfe

27/10/2010 SUBMITTED 01/01/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED
§§10, 14, 18

PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED: replies largely satisfactory

25/04/2011 [HRC] Letter sent. 30/08/2011 [HRC] Letter sent 20/09/2011 [SP] FU report 27/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Stating that 18 and parts of 14 are satisfactory. Requesting add. info on 10, 14.

Stating that the reply was not satisfactory. Request for additional information (§§14, 10)

§10

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§14

Largely satisfactory

[A]

Informing that the FU procedure has come to an end, and recalling that the

next periodic report is due on 1/1/2015.

Recommended action: NONE

Republic of Moldova (second report) CCPR/C/MDA/CO/2 §§ 8, 9, 16, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 03/12/2010 [SP] FU report

29/10/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/10/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

ACCEPTED: Adopted Oct. 2011

§8

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§9

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

44

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

05/03/2011 [EXT] Legal Resources Center (LCR), La Strada, Doina Ioana Straistenau Human Rights Lawyer, Promo Lex
06/06/2011 [EXT] UNCT 19/09/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

§16

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

§18

Implementation begun but not completed [B2]

Requesting additional info. on para. 9a, 9b, 16, 18b and stating that no info was provided on para. 8b and 18 (recommendation not implemented).

Recommended Action: REMINDER Croatia (second report) CCPR/C/HRV/CO/2 §§ 5, 10, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 17/01/2011 [SP] FU report
09/05/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

28/10/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

30/10/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

ACCEPTED

§5

Part satisfactory, part incomplete

[B2]

§10

Incomplete

[B2]

§17

Incomplete

[B2]

Stating that implementation had begun but not completed. Add. info requested on 5, 10. Init. info requested on 17.

14/06/2011 [SP] FU report 21/11/2011 [HRC] letter sent

§5

Incomplete

§10

10(c) largely satisfactory, 10(a) and (b) [A]/[B2]

incomplete

§17

Not implemented

[C1]

Informing that the reply was largely satisf. for 10(c), that 17 has not been implemented, and requesting add. info. on 5, 10(a), 10(b).

Recommended action: REMINDER

Russian Federation (sixth report) CCPR/C/RUS/CO/6 §§ 13, 14, 16, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 22/10/2010 [SP] FU report
01/03/2011 [EXT] CCPR (Memorial; AGORA; International Youth Human Rights Movement; Civil Assistance)

28/10/2010 SUBMITTED 01/11/2012 NOT SUBMITTED NOT APPLICABLE

§13 §14 §16 §17 §§14, 16, 17

Not implemented Not implemented Not implemented Not implemented

PROCEDURE CONTINUES
[C1] [C1] [C1] [C1]

GE.12-43178

45

CCPR/C/104/2*

Feb. 2011 [EXT] Amnesty International 19/10/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

§§13, 14, 16
Requesting additional information on para. 13, 14, 16.

Recommended Action: REMINDER Ecuador (fifth and sixth reports) CCPR/C/RUS/CO/5 §§ 9, 13, 19

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 10/05/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent 31/05/2011 [SP] FU report
20/09/2011 [EXT] CCPR (Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos)

29/10/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

30/10/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

§9

Incomplete

[B2]

§13

Incomplete

[B2]

§19

Incomplete

[B2]

§§9, 13, 19

22/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Requesting additional information on paras. 9, 19 and 13.

Recommended action: REMINDER

98th session: March 2010

New Zealand (fifth report) CCPR/C/NZL/CO/5 §§ 12, 14, 19

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

25/03/2010 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

Due date for the next periodic report:

30/03/2015 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

ACCEPTED

History of the procedure

19/04/2011 [SP] FU report

02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminder sent

11/04/2011 [SP] FU report (not received until§12

Incomplete

[B2]

August 2011)

§14

Incomplete

[B2]

§19

Incomplete

[B2]

20/10/2011 [EXT] AIR Trust

§§12, 14, 19

(19 erroneously labelled as 16)

03/01/2012 [HRC] Letter sent.

Requesting additional information on paras. 12, 14 and 19.

12/02/2012 [SP] Reply

Recommended action: ANALYSE REPLY AT NEXT SESSION

Mexico (fourth report) CCPR/C/MEX/CO/4 §§ 8, 9, 15, 20

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

23/03/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

30/03/2014 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

46

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

21/03/2011 [SP] FU report 22/09/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

§8

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§9

Largely satisfactory

[A]

§15

Incomplete

[B2]

§20

Incomplete

[B2]

§§12, 14, 19

(19 erroneously labelled as 16)

Requesting additional information on 15, 20. Updated info requested in next periodic report on 8, 9.

Recommended Action: REMINDER Argentina (fourth report) CCPR/C/ARG/CO/4 §§ 17, 18, 25

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 24/05/2011 [SP] FU report
29/06/2011 [EXT] La Memoria de la Provincia de Buenos Aires
30/06/2011 [EXT] CELS
18/07/2011 [EXT] Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, Mendoza Province

23/03/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

30/03/2014 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

§17

Incomplete

[B2]

§18

Incomplete

[B2]

§25

Incomplete

[B2]

§§17, 18

§§17, 18, 25

22/09/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Requesting additional information on paras. 17, 18, 25

Recommended action: REMINDER

Uzbekistan (third report) CCPR/C/UZB/CO/3 §§ 8, 11, 14, 24

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 02/08/2011 [HRC] Reminders sent - 17/9/2011
01/02/2012 [SP] Reply. Sent to translation 99th session: July 2010

24/03/2011 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 30/03/2013 NOT SUBMITTED REFUSED
Recommended Action: ANALYSE REPLY AT THE NEXT SESSION

Cameroon (fourth report) CCPR/C/CMR/CO/4 §§ 8, 17, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report:

29/07/2011 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE DISCONTINUED. No 30/07/2013 NOT SUBMITTED SP reply received. LOIPR upcoming.

GE.12-43178

47

CCPR/C/104/2*

LOIPR status History of the procedure

ACCEPTED: Adopted Oct. 2011

28/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Informing that, in the absence of a reply to [D1] FU questions, the Committee will maintain them in the LOIPR.

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE´S ANALYSIS
Colombia (sixth report) CCPR/C/COL/CO/6 §§ 9, 14, 16

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 08/08/2011 [SP] FU report 18/09/2011 [MEET] Meeting of the
secretariat with the Comisón Colombiana de Juristas

28/07/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2014 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

22/09/2011 [EXT] Comisíon Colombiana de §§9, 14, 16 Juristas

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§9

Not implemented

[C1]

§14

Incomplete and part not implemented

[B2] and [D1]

§16

Incomplete

[B2]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE´S ANALYSIS

Estonia (third report) CCPR/C/EST/CO/3 §§ 5, 6

Status

Due date for the follow-up report:

27/07/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

Due date for the next periodic report:

30/07/2015 NOT SUBMITTED

LOIPR status

UNDECIDED

History of the procedure

12/08/2011 [SP] FU report

§5

Incomplete

[B2]

§6

Incomplete

[B2]

05/10/2011 [EXT] Legal Information Centre §§5, 6 for Human Rights

29/11/2011 [HRC] Letter sent

Requesting additional information on paras. 5-6

20/01/2012 [SP] FU reply

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

§5

Incomplete

[B2]

§6

Incomplete

[B2]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE´S ANALYSIS

48

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

Israel (third report) CCPR/C/ISR/CO/3
Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 01/08/2011 [EXT] Defence for Children
International 26/08/2011 [EXT] BADIL 30/08/2011 [EXT] CCPR (Negev
Coexistence Forum for Civil Equality) 31/08/2011 [EXT] CCPR (Adalah)
31/10/2011 [SP] FU report

§§ 8, 11, 22, 24

29/07/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

30/07/2013 NOT SUBMITTED

ACCEPTED

§22

§§8, 24 §24

§§8, 11, 22, 24
Recommended Action: ANALYSE REPLY AND NGO INFORMATION AT THE NEXT SESSION

100th session: October 2010

El Salvador (sixth report) CCPR/C/SLV/CO/6 §§ 5, 10, 14, 15

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

27/10/2011 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 01/07/2014 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Recommended Action: REMINDER Poland (sixth report) CCPR/C/POL/CO/6 §§ 10, 12, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 03/04/2012 [SP] FU report
Belgium (fifth report) CCPR/C/BEL/CO/5

26/10/2011 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 26/10/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED
Recommended Action: ANALYSE REPLY AT THE NEXT SESSION §§ 14, 17, 21

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

26/10/2011 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

31/10/2015 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

See CCPR.C.104.R.1

GE.12-43178

49

CCPR/C/104/2*

18/11/2011 [SP] FU report

§14

Incomplete. Satisfactory on the outcome of [B1] - [A]

investigation on complaints following the 29

Sept. and 1 Oct. 2010 manifestations.

§17

Incomplete.

[B2]

§21

Incomplete.

[B1]

Recommended action: LETTER REFLECTING COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

Jordan (third report) CCPR/C/JOR/CO/3 §§ 5, 11, 12

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 28/02/2011 NGO report: Amman Centre for
Human Rights Studies

27/10/2011 NOT SUBMITTED 27/10/2014 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

Recommended Action: REMINDER Hungary (fifth report) CCPR/C/HUN/CO/5 §§ 6, 15, 18

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

27/10/2011 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 29/10/2014 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

101st session: March 2011

Recommended Action: REMINDER

Serbia (second report) CCPR/C/SRB/CO/2 §§ 12, 17, 22

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

29/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 01/04/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Recommended Action: Slovakia (third report) CCPR/C/SVK/CO/3 §§ 7, 8, 13

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

28/03/2012 SUBMITTED

PROCEDURE CONTINUES

01/04/2015 NOT SUBMITTED

UNDECIDED

50

GE.12-43178

CCPR/C/104/2*

28/03/2012 [SP] FU report Recommended Action: ANALYSE REPLY AT THE NEXT SESSION
Mongolia (fifth report) CCPR/C/MNG/CO/5 §§ 5, 12, 17

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

30/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 01/04/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Seychelles (in the absence of a report)

Recommended Action:

Togo (fourth report) CCPR/C/TGO/CO/4 Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure 06/03/2012 Common report of NGO
coalition
17/04/2012 [SP] FU report

§§ 10, 15, 16

28/03/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 01/04/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

§10

B2 / C

§15

B2 / C

§16

B2 / C

Recommended Action: Analyse reply at the next session

102nd session: July 2011

Ethiopia (initial report) CCPR/C/ETH/CO/1 §§ 16, 17, 25

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

25/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 28/07/2014 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Recommended Action: Kazakhstan (initial report) CCPR/C/KAZ/CO/1 §§ 7, 21, 25, 26

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

26/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 29/07/2014 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Recommended Action:

GE.12-43178

51

CCPR/C/104/2*

Bulgaria (third report) CCPR/C/BGR/CO/3 §§ 8, 11, 21

Status Due date for the follow-up report: Due date for the next periodic report: LOIPR status History of the procedure

25/07/2012 NOT SUBMITTED PROCEDURE CONTINUES 29/07/2015 NOT SUBMITTED UNDECIDED

Recommended Action:

52

GE.12-43178

