United Nations
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.5
Distr.: General 29 August 2019
Original: English

Human Rights Committee

Report on follow-up to the concluding observations of the Committee*
Addendum

Evaluation of the information on follow-up to the concluding observations on Turkmenistan

Concluding observations (119th session): CCPR/C/TKM/CO/2, 23 March 2017

Follow-up paragraphs:

17, 21 and 23

Follow-up reply:

CCPR/C/TKM/CO/2/Add.1, 10 July 2018

Committee’s evaluation:

Additional information required on paragraphs 17[C], 21[C] and 23[C][B]

Paragraph 17: Secret detention and enforced disappearances
The State party should, as a matter of urgency:
(a) End the practice of secret detention and enforced disappearances;
(b) Disclose the fate or the whereabouts of forcibly disappeared persons and allow all detained persons visits from their families and confidential access to their lawyers;
(c) Ensure that all reported cases of enforced disappearance are promptly, thoroughly and impartially investigated, that perpetrators are brought to justice and punished with appropriate sanctions, and that victims of enforced disappearance and their relatives are informed about the outcome of the investigation and are provided with full reparation.

Summary of State party’s reply
(a) and (b) Legislation to combat trafficking in persons is based on the Constitution and dealt with under the Act against Trafficking in Persons of 2016, aiming at preventing trafficking and acquiring the status of trafficking victims for persons who have been trafficked;
(c) Articles 101 and 113 of the Criminal Code set penalties for the killing and the cruel treatment of a person who has been abducted or taken hostage.

* Adopted by the Committee at its 126th session (1–26 July 2019).
GE.19-14752(E)


CCPR/C/126/2/Add.5

Committee’s evaluation
[C] (a), (b) and (c): The Committee notes the limited information provided, which was already transmitted to the Committee during the consideration of the second periodic report of Turkmenistan. The Committee regrets the lack of information on the practice of secret detention and enforced disappearances and on measures taken to disclose the fate or the whereabouts of forcibly disappeared persons and to allow all detained persons visits from their families and confidential access to their lawyers.
The Committee appreciates the information on the articles of the Criminal Code that provide for the punishment of perpetrators of killing and cruel treatment of a person who has been abducted or taken hostage. However, it regrets that no information was provided on any provisions regarding enforced disappearance and measures taken to ensure that cases of enforced disappearance are investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice and punished with appropriate sanctions. The Committee seeks clarification on the penalties imposed under articles 101 and 113 and information on reparation and knowledge of investigations carried out. The Committee reiterates its recommendation.

Paragraph 21: Torture and ill-treatment

The State party should take urgent and robust measures to eliminate torture and ill-treatment effectively and to end the impunity for such acts, inter alia, by:

(a) Ensuring that the prohibitions of forced confessions and the inadmissibility of evidence procured by torture are effectively enforced in practice by law enforcement officers and by judges;

(b) Providing adequate training on torture prevention and humane treatment to law enforcement personnel;

(c) torture;

Implementing an accessible and effective complaint mechanism against

(d) Ensuring that all allegations of torture and other ill-treatment, hazing and deaths in custody are reported and promptly and thoroughly investigated by an independent and impartial body, that perpetrators are prosecuted and, if convicted, are punished with sanctions consistent with the severity of the crime, and that victims and, where appropriate, their families have both in law and in practice access to full reparation, including rehabilitation and adequate compensation.

Summary of State party’s reply
(a) The State party established liability for the use of violence by law enforcement officers against the accused for the purpose of obtaining testimony. Article 182 of the Criminal Code establishes liability for abuse of authority and article 227 prohibits the use of violence, threats or other unlawful measures during pretrial investigations. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is taking steps to prevent detainees from being subjected to torture or ill-treatment;
(b) “Officer students” of the police, those taking courses at the Ministry of Internal Affairs Institute, and personnel of the relevant units of the internal affairs agencies are trained on the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and methods for the interrogation of persons held in custody.
Regular courses are organized for personnel working in correctional institutions on relevant international conventions and treaties pertaining to torture and humane treatment of individuals;
(c) Prisoners have the right under article 8 of the Penalties Enforcement Code to submit proposals, statements and complaints to the relevant administration of the penal institution where they are being held, to the supervisory bodies of the institutions, the courts, prosecutorial authorities, civil society associations and to international human rights organizations. Once such complaints are received, the authorities must examine them within a prescribed period and communicate any decisions to the prisoner concerned;

2

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.5
(d) No information provided.
Committee’s evaluation
[C] (a), (b), (c) and (d): While noting the information provided on liability for law enforcement officials who use violence to procure testimony and who abuse their authority, the Committee draws the State party’s attention to the fact that it was already provided with that information during the consideration of the second periodic report of Turkmenistan. The Committee requires information on measures taken in practice to ensure that evidence procured by torture is inadmissible in court. It also requires information on cases in which articles 182 and 227 of the Criminal Code have been applied since the adoption of the concluding observations.
The Committee appreciates the State party’s efforts to provide training on torture and humane treatment to law enforcement personnel. However, it notes that the State party has not provided information on the periodicity of this training, the number of personnel trained, if the training is mandatory and whether such training has been conducted since the Committee issued its concluding observations. The Committee seeks additional information on these points.
The Committee notes the information provided by the State party on the complaint mechanisms for prisoners who are victims of torture under article 8 of the Penalties Enforcement Code. Nevertheless, the Committee seeks clarification on the use of this mechanism in practice, in particular the number of complaints received and concrete actions taken in response to those complaints since the adoption of the concluding observations.
The Committee regrets that no information was provided on the recommendation to ensure that allegations of torture and ill-treatment are reported, investigated and prosecuted by an independent body, that appropriate sanctions are imposed for those convicted of such acts, and that reparation is offered to victims where applicable. The Committee reiterates its recommendation.
Paragraph 23: Treatment of prisoners
The State party should:
(a) As a matter of priority, take measures to establish a system of regular and independent monitoring of places of detention without prior notice and create the conditions necessary to facilitate effective monitoring by independent organizations and reinforce its efforts to grant meaningful access to places of detention to the International Committee of the Red Cross;
(b) Take effective measures to eliminate overcrowding in places of detention, including by resorting to non-custodial alternative measures to detention;
(c) Ensure that persons deprived of liberty are treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person and, to this end, redouble efforts to improve conditions of detention in accordance with the Covenant and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules);
(d) Ensure the availability of an effective complaint mechanism, investigate violations of inmates’ rights promptly and thoroughly, bring perpetrators to justice with appropriate penalties, and provide effective remedies and full reparation to victims, including adequate compensation.
Summary of State party’s reply
(a) The State party reiterates the information provided in its replies to the list of issues (CCPR/C/TKM/Q/2/Add.1, paras. 117–121) regarding regular and independent monitoring of places of detention without prior notice, facilitating effective monitoring by independent organizations and reinforcing efforts to grant access to places of detention to
3

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.5
the International Committee of the Red Cross, with updated statistics for the years prior to the issuance of the concluding observations;
(b) Amendments introduced in 2013 to the Criminal Code allowed for noncustodial sentences, including house arrest, replaced deprivation of liberty with fines and reduced the length of sentences for certain crimes.
In addition, the offences of battery and insult were amended to eliminate criminal liability and now carry only administrative liability. Some articles give rise only to criminal liability if they are repeat offences committed within one year of each other;
(c) The State party reiterates the information provided in its replies to the list of issues (paras. 103, 108 and 111–116) regarding humane treatment of prisoners and efforts to improve detention conditions in line with the Covenant and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Up-to-date medical equipment was acquired for prisons with US$ 1,794,500 allocated from the State budget;
(d) No information provided.
Committee’s evaluation [C] (a), (b) and (d): The Committee welcomes the new information provided on country visits conducted by international delegations to detention institutions, but notes that these visits occurred prior to the adoption of the concluding observations. The Committee regrets that no information was provided on measures taken and progress made since the adoption of the concluding observations. The Committee reiterates its recommendation.
The Committee notes the information provided by the State party, including the amendments to several articles of the Criminal Code aiming to reduce or eliminate criminal liability and adopt new non-custodial sentences. The Committee requires information on the timing of these amendments, the actual reduction in the length of sentences in the Criminal Code, the impact of these amendments on the number of persons detained in the State party and additional measures taken after the adoption of the concluding observations to eliminate overcrowding in places of detention. The State party should provide updated statistics on the current situation of overcrowding in prisons, disaggregated by prison, over the past three years.
The Committee regrets that no information was provided on the availability of an effective complaint mechanism, on measures taken to investigate violations of inmates’ rights and on efforts to bring perpetrators to justice with appropriate penalties. The Committee reiterates its recommendation. [B] (c): The Committee appreciates the information on the funds used to purchase medical equipment for prisons. The Committee regrets, however, that the State party provided no further information on measures taken and progress made since the adoption of the concluding observations towards ensuring humane treatment of prisoners and improved detention conditions. The Committee reiterates its recommendation. Recommended action: A letter should be sent informing the State party of the discontinuation of the follow-up procedure. The information requested should be addressed in the State party’s next periodic report. Next periodic report: 29 March 2020.
4

