United Nations
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.2
Distr.: General 28 August 2019 English Original: Spanish

Human Rights Committee

Report on follow-up to the concluding observations of the Committee
Addendum

Evaluation of the information on follow-up to the concluding observations on Ecuador

Concluding observations (117th session): Follow-up paragraphs: Follow-up reply: Committee’s evaluation:
Information from nongovernmental organizations:

CCPR/C/ECU/CO/6, 11 August 2016
20, 24 and 28
CCPR/C/ECU/CO/6/Add.1, 8 August 2017
Additional information required on paragraphs 20[B], 24[B] and 28[B]
Comité Permanente por la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos, Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos, Coalición Nacional de Mujeres del Ecuador and Ecuador ama la vida

Paragraph 20: Truth Commission
The State party should adopt the necessary measures to expedite judicial investigations into the cases of human rights violations set out in the report of the Truth Commission and ensure that those alleged to be responsible are prosecuted and, if found guilty, punished commensurately with the seriousness of their actions. The State party should also increase its efforts to ensure that victims and their family members have prompt access to full reparation, taking all necessary measures, including compensation.
Summary of State party’s reply
Information was provided on the Truth Commission (2007) and the Office of the Commission of Truth and Human Rights (2012).
Currently, 12 cases are being processed: 3 for crimes against humanity and 9 for serious human rights violations. These cases show that progress is being made in overcoming “substantive and procedural obstacles”, opening the way for the remaining 106 cases currently at the preliminary stages of investigation. Three landmark judgments have been achieved.
 Adopted by the Committee at its 126th session (1–26 July 2019).
GE.19-14574 (E) 300919 300919


CCPR/C/126/2/Add.2
The Attorney General’s Office has worked very closely with victims of human rights violations at workshops held in several of the country’s provinces. In 2016, the Office opened the Plaza de la Memoria, a public space to preserve memory and combat impunity.
With regard to reparations for victims, the State party has created a comprehensive reparations programme which has been endorsed by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Of the 189 cases documented, 6 have resulted in compensation agreements. In the third quarter of 2017, 7 new compensation agreements will be signed with 13 beneficiaries, while 59 cases are currently under negotiation.
Information from non-governmental organizations
Coalición Nacional de Mujeres del Ecuador
The investigations were not conducted in line with international standards, and the criteria used for selecting cases for investigation were not clear. Some victims and their lawyers have been subjected to harassment and intimidation. The reparation measures provided were insufficient.
Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos
No progress has been made in the prosecution of those responsible for the violations documented in the report of the Truth Commission. Some progress was made in the reparation measures granted to victims.
Comité Permanente por la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos
The appeal submitted in November 2016 by the defendants in the case of González et al. (“Fybeca”) remains pending.
Committee’s evaluation
[B]: The Committee takes note of the information provided by the State party, but requires additional information on: (a) the measures taken to expedite judicial investigations into the cases of human rights violations set out in the report of the Truth Commission, including a timetable for the resolution of the remaining 106 cases currently at the preliminary stages of investigation; (b) the criteria used to select the cases to be investigated; (c) the workshops with victims organized by the Attorney General’s Office, including details of how many such workshops have been held since the adoption of the Committee’s concluding observations; and (d) the progress made in ensuring that victims and their family members have access to full reparation in all cases, including an update on whether the agreements the State indicated would be signed in 2017 have been finalized, and on the status of the 59 cases referred to by the State party.
Paragraph 24: Conditions of detention and violence in prison
The State party should take due note of the previous concluding observations (CCPR/C/ECU/CO/5, para. 17) and increase its efforts to continue improving conditions of detention and eliminating overcrowding, in particular by ensuring the effective implementation of regulations relating to alternatives to the deprivation of liberty. It further recommends that the State party redouble its efforts to prevent and put a stop to violence in places of deprivation of liberty and continue ensuring that all incidents of violence between inmates, particularly incidents that have resulted in deaths, are investigated and that those responsible are punished commensurately with the seriousness of their actions.
Summary of State party’s reply
The rate of overcrowding in 2016 was 22.45 per cent, owing to the loss of prison places following an earthquake. Around US$ 400 million was invested in the creation of more than 16,000 new places in social rehabilitation centres.

2

GE.19-14574

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.2

A new prison management model has been introduced to reduce recidivism and establish rehabilitation procedures in suitable facilities. The model covers the core areas of education, health, sport and family ties.
In 2016, a protocol on visits was issued to regulate monitoring, searches and security procedures in social rehabilitation centres. A protocol on supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons deprived of their liberty was also implemented.
In 2017, the use of electronic monitoring devices was introduced as an alternative to deprivation of liberty. A total of 290 devices are currently in use.
Between 2010 and 2016, 1,971 prison officials received training on topics such as human rights in the prison context. A course on prison security has been introduced.
In order to reduce levels of violence, the Treatment and Life Plan Office is responsible for managing and implementing plans, programmes, projects and activities that promote culture, employment, education and sport.
Information from non-governmental organizations
Coalición Nacional de Mujeres del Ecuador
Under the new prison management model, visiting rights and access to legal counsel have been restricted. Among other things, the model does not take account of the personal circumstances of women, mothers, persons with disabilities and persons with chronic diseases. The newly opened prison facilities are very large and are located some distance away from population centres, leading to a sense of isolation among detainees, prison violence and a negative impact on the finances and living conditions of prisoners’ families.
Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos
In criminal proceedings, detention is the norm. The situation in prisons has not improved; inmates complain about unsatisfactory conditions of detention, the shortage of personal hygiene items and poor nutrition. The Comisión Ecuménica noted several cases of violence in prisons in 2017.
Comité Permanente por la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos
This organization received several reports of human rights violations in prisons. The number of inmates has increased in recent years: 36,673 persons were deprived of their liberty in Ecuador in 2017. The organization documented a number of complaints relating to a lack of medical care for prisoners, arbitrary bans on visits and abusive searches of women entering prisons.
Committee’s evaluation
[B]: The Committee takes note of the information provided by the State party, but requires additional information on: (a) the rate of overcrowding in detention centres over the last three years and the specific measures that have been implemented since the adoption of the concluding observations to eliminate overcrowding in detention facilities; (b) the training provided to prison staff to improve conditions for persons deprived of their liberty and to reduce levels of violence; (c) the new prison management model, including the date on which it was implemented and details of how it operates in practice; and (d) investigations into allegations of violence in places of detention, the prosecutions brought and the penalties imposed.
Paragraph 28: Freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly
The State party should adopt appropriate measures to ensure that all persons under its jurisdiction can exercise in practice their right to freedom of peaceful assembly; redouble its efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of the excessive use of force by law enforcement officials and members of the security forces; and take appropriate action to ensure that all allegations of the excessive use of force are investigated thoroughly, independently and impartially and that the alleged

GE.19-14574

3

CCPR/C/126/2/Add.2
perpetrators are brought to justice and, if found guilty, punished commensurately with the seriousness of their actions.
Summary of State party’s reply
Decree No. 739 (2015) establishes the definition, nature and purpose of assembly. It does not place any restrictions on freedom of association and is aligned with the relevant international human rights instruments.
The State party makes reference to a comprehensive in-service training programme for police officers in the areas of human rights, principles of policing and police procedures. It also refers to regulations on the legal, appropriate and proportionate use of force by police officers. In 2016, 46,377 police officers received training in that regard.
The 2017 Organic Code governing Public Security and Public Order Institutions ensures that security forces prioritize the use of preventive and deterrent activities and procedures over the use of force, with a view to safeguarding the life, integrity and freedom of individuals.
In total, 74 cases of excessive use of force were recorded in 2016, and 29 in 2017.
Information from non-governmental organizations
Comisión Ecuménica de Derechos Humanos
This organization noted that decrees Nos. 17 and 739 have been criticized at the national and international levels because they are not in line with international standards on freedom of association. It also made reference to two cases, both involving excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, that had not yet been investigated.
Committee’s evaluation
[B]: The Committee welcomes the information provided by the State party. However, it regrets that no additional information has been provided on the steps taken since the adoption of the concluding observations in 2016, in particular with regard to: (a) investigations into complaints of excessive use of force and efforts to bring the alleged perpetrators to justice and to impose appropriate punishments; and (b) the training activities conducted in the past three years to prevent and eliminate all forms of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials in the context of peaceful assemblies. The State party should also clarify whether decrees Nos. 17 and 739 are in line with the Covenant.
Recommended action: A letter should be sent informing the State party of the discontinuation of the follow-up procedure. The information requested should be included in the State party’s next periodic report.
Next periodic report: 15 July 2021.

4

GE.19-14574

