United Nations
General Assembly

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
Distr.: General 2 March 2026 English Original: Spanish

Human Rights Council
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fifty-second session Geneva, 4-15 May 2026
National report submitted pursuant to Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 16/21*
Paraguay

* The present document is being issued without formal editing. GE.26-02845 (E) 110326 110326

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
Introduction
1. The Republic of Paraguay presents its national report on the implementation of the recommendations received in 2021 during the third cycle of the universal periodic review. On that occasion, Paraguay accepted 202 of the 210 recommendations received.
2. This report brings together information on the efforts made, measures taken, progress and achievements realised, and pending challenges and obstacles, based on information provided by representatives of around 66 State agencies and entities of the three branches of government (executive, legislative and judicial) and the autonomous government bodies that make up the network of focal points operating under the Recommendations Monitoring System (SIMORE Plus), the national mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up, coordinated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice.
3. For ease of reference, a list of initialisms, acronyms and abbreviations is included in Annex I.
Follow-up to recommendations
Ratification of international instruments1
4. Paraguay has ratified most of the universal human rights instruments, demonstrating an ongoing willingness to cooperate with international mechanisms.
5. In this regard, it considers that the potential ratification of new instruments should result from an internal process of analysis involving the various stakeholders and relevant sectors. This approach enriches discussions of social, political and economic factors and ensures that any parliamentary decision is made on the basis of an objective assessment and is in line with national capacities, needs and priorities. Therefore, the question of whether to incorporate new international commitments into domestic law is determined by the sovereign decisions that each State adopts in accordance with its situation and possibilities, and is subject to the conclusions that arise from the aforementioned internal deliberation process.
6. In this connection, Paraguay ratified the Convention against Discrimination in Education in 2025. In December 2025, it approved accession to the Inter-American Convention on Protecting the Human Rights of Older Persons.
7. With regard to the Inter-American Convention against Racism, Racial Discrimination and Related Forms of Intolerance, Paraguay notes that it is a State Party to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and considers that the obligations and guarantees provided for in this treaty already encompass the rights established in the inter-American instrument.
8. It also points out that it has assumed a solid framework of international commitments relating to economic, social and cultural rights, particularly through the American Convention on Human Rights and the mechanisms of the inter-American system. In this regard, the possible ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights continues to be the subject of internal analysis, taking into account the need to avoid overlap and ensure adequate coordination between the universal and regional systems.
National Human Rights Plan2
9. The State's Human Rights Network, which is coordinated by the Ministry of Justice, implements the National Human Rights Plan. Within this framework, the fourth Action Plan of the Human Rights Network (2024-2028) was approved in 2024 with the strategic aim of promoting inter-agency and intersectoral coordination to implement the National Human Rights Plan, strengthening mechanisms for defending, protecting and promoting human rights by coordinating the policies, plans and programmes of the State agencies and entities that make up the Network.

2

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
Cooperation with international human rights mechanisms3
10. With regard to the open and standing invitation to the special procedures, as a result of effective inter-agency coordination, official visits were received in 2022 from the Special Rapporteur on the implications for human rights of the environmentally sound management and disposal of hazardous substances and wastes and the Special Rapporteur on minority issues.
11. Paraguay is up to date with its reporting obligations to the treaty bodies, having submitted reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee against Torture, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Committee on Enforced Disappearances, the Committee on Migrant Workers (follow-up report) and the midterm report on the implementation of the recommendations arising from the universal periodic review. The country also actively participated in the constructive dialogues relating to its second periodic report for the Committee on Migrant Workers; its combined second and third periodic reports for the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; and its combined fourth to sixth periodic reports for the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
12. In addition, the national report and questionnaire on the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the second voluntary national report on the implementation of the Montevideo Consensus on Population and Development were submitted.
13. Paraguay successfully completed its second term as a member of the Human Rights Council (2022-2024), consolidating its presence, visibility and international standing. During this period, it held the regional vice-presidency, led thematic initiatives and co-sponsored side events, including activities related to strengthening national mechanisms responsible for implementation, monitoring and reporting.
14. The participation of the President of Paraguay in the high-level segment of the fifty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council constituted the first address made by a President of Paraguay before this body, reaffirming the Government's political commitment at the highest level.
15. Paraguay has used inter-agency coordination mechanisms to respond regularly and in a coordinated manner to questionnaires sent by special procedures, thereby strengthening constructive dialogue and ongoing cooperation with these mandates.
16. The 180th session of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights was successfully organized in Asunción. The session coincided with the twentieth anniversary of the first session of the Court to be held away from its headquarters in Costa Rica, which also took place in Paraguay, in 2005, reinforcing the country's pioneering role in the decentralization of the Court's sessions and the promotion of human rights in the region.
Office of the Ombudsman4
17. The Office of the Ombudsman was re-accredited with category A status by the Subcommittee on Accreditation of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions. The re-accreditation was officially granted in 2025 and certifies that the Office is in full compliance with the Paris Principles in respect of its independence, broad mandate, pluralism, adequate resources and effective functioning. The re-accreditation also reflects the State's commitment and efforts to ensure a regulatory, institutional and operational framework that allows the Office of the Ombudsman to effectively exercise its mandate in line with international standards.

GE.26-02845

3

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
Poverty reduction5
18. Between 2021 and 2024, the monetary poverty rate in Paraguay fell from approximately 26% to 20% of the population, reaching one of the lowest levels ever recorded. The extreme poverty rate also fell to around 4% and the multidimensional poverty rate was reduced to around 15.6%.
19. The Cabinet Council on Social Affairs within the Office of the President is implementing the social protection system to promote social inclusion and cohesion, with a special focus on Indigenous Peoples, children aged 4 years or under, women, persons with disabilities and persons living in poverty, guaranteeing access to fundamental rights such as education, health and employment. This comprehensive public policy is structured across the life course of beneficiaries and focuses on three fundamental pillars: social integration; integration into the labour market and productive activities; and social welfare.
20. The National Development Plan 2050 is the State's guiding instrument for long-term planning. Its purpose is to align public policies, investment and State actions with a vision of sustainable, inclusive and people-centred development, ensuring the continuity of State policies.
21. The Ñaime Porãvéta National Poverty Reduction Plan 2023-2030 is the State's main instrument for reducing monetary and multidimensional poverty. It is implemented in a progressive and localized manner, with inter-agency coordination, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, prioritizing children and adolescents, women, older persons, persons with disabilities and Indigenous Peoples to ensure effective access to income, basic services and opportunities.
22. The "Zero Hunger in Schools" programme is a school meals strategy whose purpose is to ensure that lunches are provided to all students in the education system. Since its launch, the Government has invested more than $350 million, achieving 100% coverage nationwide and feeding more than 1,050,000 children and adolescents every day. This programme has created formal employment opportunities for 17,231 people, 94% of whom are women.
23. The Tekoporã Programme, which is aimed at households living in poverty and extreme poverty, prioritizes groups in vulnerable situations and combines cash transfers with social and family support and shared responsibilities in the areas of health and education, contributing to the reduction of extreme poverty and the prevention of its intergenerational transmission. The Programme currently benefits 191,314 families, or a total of 573,478 persons.
24. Other programmes that have been implemented: (1) the Tekoha Programme, the purpose of which is to guarantee access to land ownership for vulnerable families living in poverty by legalizing and organizing the occupation of areas in and on the periphery of cities (6,826 sales contracts between 2021 and 2025); (2) the Tenonderã Programme, the purpose of which is to promote the socioeconomic inclusion of families living in poverty and in vulnerable situations who are beneficiaries of the Tekoporã Programme by building their capacities and increasing their productive and financial assets for starting or strengthening businesses (42,269 beneficiaries in the period 2021-2025).
25. The Che Róga Porã Programme facilitates access to home ownership for working class people by granting them mortgages on very favourable terms, with preferential rates of 6.5% per annum and terms of up to 30 years, allowing Paraguayan citizens, including those living abroad, to purchase, build or renovate homes, with payments similar to what they would pay in rent. Since its launch, 5,050 loans have been pre-approved or are under review. The Programme has a significant impact on financial inclusion, as 48% of the loans were granted to women.
26. Act No. 7322/2024, which establishes the universal pension for older adults, provides for the granting of a monthly pension of no less than 25% of the current legal minimum wage and sets out objective criteria governing automatic inclusion on the basis of age and differentiated measures for persons with severe disabilities and members of Indigenous

4

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
communities. It also provides for additional benefits relating to access to, and inclusion in, transport services and cultural and recreational activities. It currently benefits 340,203 people.
Labour rights6
27. The National Employment Plan 2022-2026 guides public policies on labour issues, with an emphasis on generating decent employment, formalizing work and strengthening the capabilities of the workforce, prioritizing people in vulnerable situations.
28. The Integrated Strategy for Employment Formalization 2025-2028 was approved to address the significant challenges posed by informal employment. In this connection, the Inter-Agency Commission for the Formalization of Employment was established as a technical body responsible for coordinating, supporting and promoting social dialogue with a view to implementing it.
29. The Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security has been implementing measures to address the situation: (i) expanding social security coverage, including by granting access to healthcare and retirement benefits for microentrepreneurs, in conjunction with the Social Security Institute; (ii) simplifying administrative formalization procedures, which has made it possible to optimize the registration of more than 50,000 companies and facilitate the incorporation of workers into formal employment; and (iii) strengthening enforcement measures by monitoring and inspecting the working conditions of more than 6,500 workers.
30. The Comprehensive Employment Policy for Supporting Working Women is being implemented, prioritizing the promotion and protection of women's rights, particularly women who are pregnant, breastfeeding or victims of workplace violence. Furthermore, the Tripartite Commission on Equal Opportunities was revived with the aim of consolidating a permanent forum for social dialogue. In this connection, work was carried out on the development of the National Strategy for Labour Equity.
31. The National Handicraft Policy 2023-2030 promotes the creation of decent work by enhancing access to markets, formalization and capacity-building for artisans, including Indigenous artisans.
32. In 2023, it was established that the free services offered by the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security to place people in jobs must be provided through the EmpleaPy platform in order to link labour supply and demand, promoting the decentralization of access to public employment services.
33. The purpose of the EmpleaPy Joven initiative is to facilitate young people's access to their first formal job, supporting micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises by partially covering young people's social security contributions, reducing recruitment costs and promoting job retention through training and capacity-building activities.
34. The SAPE'A 2.0 Programme promotes access to vocational training and decent employment, prioritizing people in vulnerable situations. The results achieved include the creation of 312 formal jobs, the allocation of 465 seed capital grants to companies, and the delivery of 193 training courses, reaching 4,788 young people between the ages of 17 and 29, of whom 64% are women, 20% are persons with disabilities and 3% are members of Indigenous communities.
35. The National Fund for Micro-, Small and Medium Enterprises was established to provide technical support and financing to micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises with a view to strengthening their productivity, competitiveness and sustainability. Its purpose is to expand access to financial products, drive digitalization, promote formalization and support investment and job creation, benefiting a sector that represents approximately 80% of the country's business activity.
36. Currently, the National Commission on Fundamental Labour Rights and Prevention of Forced Labour and the National Commission for the Eradication of Child Labour are in the process of developing the National Strategy for the Prevention of Forced Labour 2026-2030

GE.26-02845

5

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
and the National Strategy for the Prevention and Eradication of Child Labour and the Protection of Adolescent Workers 2026-2030, respectively.
Health7
37. Paraguay is promoting a strategy aimed at effectively expanding coverage and decentralizing services through multidisciplinary family and community health teams. The comprehensive and integrated health-service networks have been strengthened through the construction and operation of more family health units and new regional hospitals, expanding coverage in the interior of the country.
38. In this connection, the project to expand access to and coverage of maternal and child healthcare in remote rural areas, Indigenous communities and border areas in the Chaco region, using an approach based on social and environmental determinants and factors related to access to healthcare, was completed and given a positive evaluation.
39. The number of mammography machines in public hospitals has doubled, facilitating free access for women over 40 without the need for a referral.
40. The Social Security Institute has expanded healthcare infrastructure in several facilities in the interior and signed cooperation agreements with the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare for the integration of services.
41. The enactment of Act No. 7018/2022 initiated the process of reforming mental healthcare. The purpose of the Act is to protect mental health, focusing on individuals and their psychosocial background while fully respecting their human rights.
42. The National Mental Health Policy 2024-2030 and the National Mental Health Plan 2024-2030 establish strategies for expanding decentralized coverage and strengthening the range of available services.
43. The Plan to Reduce Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Mortality 2023-2030 guides the work of the National Health System and promotes ongoing improvements to care at all levels. A national manual of family planning standards for women and men has also been issued. The Social Security Institute conducts information-sharing and prevention campaigns on sexually transmitted infections and teenage pregnancy and its consequences, strengthening awareness and access to health services.
44. The National Sexual and Reproductive Health Plan 2024-2030 promotes equitable and inclusive policies to improve access to, and the quality of, care in the National Health System. Paraguay has also adopted a model manual on comprehensive men's healthcare with a focus on maternal and child health that promotes the sharing of responsibility between women and men and the active participation of men during their partners' pregnancies.
45. These measures are reinforced by ongoing training for healthcare professionals with the aim of reducing delays in care and ensuring timely, accessible and high-quality services.
46. Inter-agency initiatives are implemented to prevent teenage pregnancies and provide comprehensive care for child and adolescent victims of sexual abuse through information-sharing, communication and education strategies inside and outside schools.
47. Paraguay has a national strategic plan for responding to HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections, and a clinical protocol and guidelines for pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis to HIV, the purpose of which is to expand HIV prevention strategies nationwide for all persons at risk by implementing promotion and prevention measures.
48. In 2024, a plan for the introduction of self-administered HIV testing was adopted to provide different population groups, in particular those at risk of HIV, with a variety of testing options.
49. Under the National Programme to Combat HIV/Aids and Other Sexually Transmitted Infections, free testing and treatment for pregnant women and the general public is guaranteed, supplemented by the National Manual of Standards for Preconception, Prenatal,

6

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
Childbirth, Birth and Postpartum Care, the Manual for the Treatment of Major Obstetric Pathologies and the Family Planning Manual.
Education8
50. The Programme for the Improvement of Paraguayan Education 2023-2028 (Ñamombarete Tekombo'e) was established to improve the quality of education as a common good.
51. As well as improving the quality of education, the State provides school meals, school kits, scholarships, discounted transport tickets and educational support measures for at-risk students to ensure that they enrol and remain in school and complete their education.
52. Enrolment has increased as a result of these programmes and the opening of new educational institutions, the creation of off-site classrooms, the establishment of grades, class groups and pathways at the early childhood, primary and upper secondary levels, and the promotion of inter-agency coordination and the provision of culturally relevant educational materials.
53. With regard to inclusive education, the centres for the comprehensive care of children and adolescents have been strengthened. Currently, there are 92 public, private and subsidized private centres that operate under the inclusive education model and accept persons with disabilities, including children and adolescents. In the public sector, there are around 33 inclusion support centres, the main function of which is to provide learning support services and specialized care with the help of health professionals in the fields of psychology, speech therapy and motor skills, among other areas.
54. A remedial education support service is implemented to guarantee education for hospitalized children and those in vulnerable situations. Also being implemented are the "Open Schools" strategy, which promotes safe recreational spaces; and learning recovery spaces, the purpose of which is to reduce educational lag and strengthen essential learning. A national plan for the provision of educational support for students with autism spectrum disorder, the implementation of which is mandatory, has been approved.
55. The National Indigenous Education Council has representatives from all 19 peoples. As part of the implementation of the National Plan for Indigenous Peoples (2020-2030), work is under way to achieve the objectives established in the area of education. Indigenous educational institutions received educational materials tailored to the sociocultural and linguistic characteristics of each people. Currently, 38,122 students are enrolled in the Indigenous education system.
56. The Government Scholarship Programme of Paraguay provides financial assistance to young students in higher education who are studying for undergraduate degrees and technical degrees or undertaking teacher training, with a focus on academic excellence. This programme sets out differentiated requirements for members of Indigenous communities and persons with disabilities.
Combating corruption and the judicial system9
57. Paraguay has established the National Integrity, Transparency and Anti-Corruption Plan, developed by the National Integrity and Transparency Team for the period 2021-2025.
58. In 2023, the National Anti-Corruption Strategy was approved to strengthen transparency and integrity in the civil service. The document sets out 4 strategic areas, 16 subtopics and 42 initiatives.
59. In 2024, Act No. 7389/2024 was enacted, establishing the National System for Integrity, Transparency and the Prevention of Corruption. In this connection, the State agencies and entities have annual plans that set out specific and measurable goals for strengthening transparency, accountability and public integrity.

GE.26-02845

7

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
60. As part of the efforts being made to bring about the accession of Paraguay to full membership of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, a working group has been set up to provide technical assistance for the possible accession to the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions, as set out in the Country Programme.
61. The Integrity Seal for 2025-2027 is being implemented with a view to recognizing and promoting companies that adopt ethical standards and good compliance practices, strengthening the culture of integrity within the private sector.
62. Progress has been made in modernizing the judicial system by digitalizing case files, electronically allocating cases and publishing decisions and statistics, thereby helping to improve transparency and traceability and reduce judicial backlogs. The judiciary has also strengthened internal monitoring mechanisms and training in judicial ethics and international human rights standards, reinforcing oversight of the lawfulness of detentions, the use of pretrial detention and the investigation of offences such as torture and trafficking in persons.
Prison system, detention conditions and torture10
63. The objective of the new prison management model is to improve living conditions and procedures for rehabilitating and reintegrating prisoners into society in Paraguay. It focuses on three pillars: humanization; social reintegration; and security and order.
64. A historic milestone was achieved with the definitive closure of the Casa del Buen Pastor Prison and the opening of a women's prison complex in Emboscada with capacity for more than 1,200 women in order to ensure decent living conditions. The prison complex has blocks arranged according to the profiles of inmates and provides comprehensive and ongoing medical care, literacy training, formal and technical education leading to qualifications, workshops for promoting employability, psychosocial and restorative support, and progressive reintegration pathways that strengthen family and community ties.
65. In 2024, a protocol for the application of alternative or substitute measures to pretrial detention was approved, establishing quarterly reviews and giving priority to cases that carry prison sentences exceeding the minimum period established by law, making it possible to establish a list of criminal cases whose characteristics might allow less burdensome measures to be applied.
66. Also worth mentioning is the cooperation agreement for the establishment of an inter-agency technical committee for the application of alternative measures to deprivation of liberty.
67. In order to ensure equitable access to healthcare in places of deprivation of liberty, comprehensive care days are held in prisons that cover clinical assessments, rapid tests, complementary studies, and health education and counselling, strengthening early detection, prevention and the provision of timely care for inmates. Healthcare has also been strengthened by digitalizing clinical records.
68. The psychiatric ward in Tacumbú National Prison has been comprehensively transformed, with the refurbishment of the inpatient ward and the addition of 15 new hospital beds for persons with intellectual or psychosocial disabilities.
69. In 2023, the Ministry of Justice approved a protocol for monitoring prisons and juvenile education centres with a view to strengthening the Ministry's monitoring of human rights in the prison system.
70. In women's prisons, activities based on a comprehensive approach are carried out, including bilingual basic education programmes, secondary education and literacy programmes, and university and vocational training programmes in collaboration with the private sector. Mention should also be made of the "Latente" programme, involving an online platform for marketing products made by prisoners.
71. In 2025, Act No. 7621 was enacted, establishing incentives for the social reintegration of prisoners through participation in work, study and training activities that can result in a

8

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
reduction of their sentences. The purpose of the Act is to strengthen public safety by creating real opportunities for training and personal development.
72. The Public Defence Service has established mechanisms for responding to allegations of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. It has also approved the introduction of a new form for recording these incidents that must be used by defenders in ordinary criminal courts, juvenile criminal courts and sentence enforcement courts with the aim of strengthening the detection, documentation and referral of cases.
73. The Adolescent Offenders Welfare Service has an educational support model, based on a restorative and interdisciplinary approach, that guides comprehensive work with adolescents serving judicial sentences. It is complemented by protocols for custodial and non-custodial measures. In juvenile education centres, adolescents receive comprehensive support from interdisciplinary technical teams with a view to promoting their rehabilitation, social reintegration and respect for their human rights.
74. In 2024, the Ministry of the Interior approved an institutional procedure for receiving and following up on complaints and subsequently referring them to the police justice system or the Public Prosecution Service to ensure the investigation of all complaints of alleged ill-treatment, torture and other cruel and inhuman treatment perpetrated by State personnel or police officers in the course of their duties.
75. The Ministry of Defence provides training to military personnel and has included a human rights and international humanitarian law programme in the curriculum for military academies. It also ensures that the national preventive mechanism has access to military institutions. The Supreme Court of Military Justice intervenes ex officio in cases involving physical injury or abuse of authority and applies the necessary measures.
76. The Ministry of Justice has an online form for receiving, processing and following up on complaints related to human rights in the prison system.
Trafficking in persons11
77. In 2025, the Ministry of the Interior was designated as the body responsible for running the National Programme for the Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in Persons and Support for Victims, which includes a fund for the implementation of the Programme, with a mandate to create a specific agency and to coordinate with the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance on the necessary budgetary measures.
78. The implementation of the National Plan to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in Persons 2020-2024 consolidated the State's response by incorporating a comprehensive approach, covering internal trafficking and strengthening inter-agency coordination through the establishment of departmental committees. An evaluation of its implementation found that significant progress had been made in respect of decentralization and coordination at the local level. It was therefore decided to extend the implementation of the Plan for the period 2025-2026 in order to ensure the continuity of strategies.
79. In 2024, a consular protocol for the detection, assistance and referral of victims of trafficking in persons was launched to strengthen consular assistance provided to Paraguayan victims of this offence abroad.
80. The State continuously organizes training activities that address early detection, comprehensive victim support, the human rights approach and inter-agency coordination, including specific initiatives for border zones and the tri-border area.
81. A manual for border officials was developed and the adoption of the Guidelines for Regional Action for the Early Detection of Situations of Trafficking in Persons at the Borders of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) States Parties and associated States was promoted.
82. The Special Unit to Combat Trafficking in Persons and the Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents of the Public Prosecution Service works with a multidisciplinary team of psychologists, social workers and lawyers to support the participation of victims in

GE.26-02845

9

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
proceedings and to facilitate their access to justice. A handbook on standard operating procedures and four protocols on the various stages of the process have been issued. In collaboration with the Anti-Trafficking Department of the National Police, special investigative techniques and international cooperation are used to combat trafficking in persons and identify new recruitment methods.
83. The Public Prosecution Service has a secure system of reporting via a form published on the websites of the institution and the Special Unit for the purpose of following up on reports.
84. The Public Defence Service has a nationwide network of public defenders that provide free legal assistance and respond immediately in cases of trafficking and exploitation of children and adolescents, including by adopting urgent protective measures and arranging alternative care in the best interests of the child.
85. Victims are provided with assistance through specialist mechanisms and complementary protection measures. These include the comprehensive care provided by the Referral Centre and the temporary shelter for women and the implementation of the Social Reintegration Programme, which is coordinated with the Victim Assistance and Support Commission under the Tekoporã and Tekoha programmes. Where children and adolescents are concerned, the Programme on Comprehensive Assistance to Victims of Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation is implemented and, in 2024, the Ñasaindy Protection Centre was opened to provide long-term protection and comprehensive care. In addition, the National Directorate of Migration applies procedures for national and foreign victims of trafficking, including the granting of residency permits and the implementation of response pathways at borders. The Secretariat for Paraguayan Returnees and Refugees issues repatriation grants, with priority being given to victims.
86. Awareness-raising and information-sharing campaigns are carried out. These include the "Date Cuenta que es un Cuento" (Spot the Lie) campaign and the "Con la Trata no se Trata" (No Truck with Trafficking) campaign, and the translation of materials into Indigenous languages. The National Secretariat for Tourism also promotes the Code of Conduct against Trafficking in the Tourism Sector.
87. Where international cooperation is concerned, mention might be made of the agreement with Bolivia, the memorandum of understanding with Chile (2021), and the Paraguay-Spain Partnership Framework for 2025-2028, which incorporate measures relating to human rights and the fight against trafficking. In addition, bilateral work plans have been formalized with Argentina and Bolivia. Paraguay is party to a MERCOSUR agreement to strengthen cooperation against trafficking in persons and participates in the Regional Platform against Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants.
88. In this regard, the country joined Red Atenas, a bi-regional mechanism for cooperation between Latin America and Europe that enables travel documents to be technically checked and alerts to be exchanged in real time.
Freedom of expression, assembly and association12
89. Relevant initiatives are currently being taken, including a bill on the protection of journalists and human rights defenders, which, after being studied in committees, was referred back to the Senate for detailed analysis of complex aspects of criminal and procedural law before its consideration is resumed.
90. In 2025, a bill on the prevention, protection and assistance of journalists and media workers who become victims of violence in the exercise of their profession was presented. The bill was the subject of favourable opinions issued by two Senate committees and its discussion in a plenary session was postponed until March 2026.
91. In 2025, work began on processing a bill to establish the Santiago Leguizamón National Journalism Award. The bill is currently under review by the relevant Senate committees.

10

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
92. The State is evaluating the establishment of a fund to strengthen the functioning of the Committee for the Safety of Journalists with a view to supporting the implementation of preventive, protective and assistance measures for journalists at risk, in compliance with the international obligations assumed under the inter-American human rights system. This assessment takes into account the institutional characteristics of the Committee and the administrative and budgetary mechanisms necessary to ensure its sustainability.
93. Act No. 7363/2024, establishing the oversight and transparency of non-profit organizations, was enacted and is regulated by Decree 4806/2025. The Act responds to the need to strengthen accountability, transparency and risk prevention in line with national and international commitments relating to integrity, including the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America to strengthen the regulatory frameworks applicable to this type of organization, especially to prevent their possible misuse in illegal activities, without affecting the exercise of fundamental rights such as the right to freedom of association.
94. This Act originated in the legislative branch and underwent public hearings and consideration of the bill in nine subcommittees of both chambers. For its part, the executive proposed substantial amendments to balance the objectives of ensuring oversight and transparency with the need to protect the autonomy of organizations, incorporating principles and guarantees and removing disproportionate penalties from the original bill.
Environment and climate change13
95. The National Commission on Climate Change is an inter-agency, participatory forum for conducting discussions, consultations and monitoring in respect of climate policy. In this connection, the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan, approved in 2022, is being implemented. The Plan was developed through multisectoral and local-level participatory processes and incorporates climate adaptation measures into national and local planning instruments.
96. Progress has been made in updating national climate policy through the country's nationally determined contribution (NDC 2.0). The third nationally determined contribution (NDC 3.0) is in the process of being developed.
97. The Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development promotes the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation in municipal and departmental sustainable development plans through workshops, technical training and participatory processes carried out in different regions of the country.
98. These measures are complemented by initiatives targeted at children, rural and Indigenous women, and persons with disabilities, such as participatory workshops, capacity-building programmes implemented on the Aula del Clima (Climate Classroom) portal, ecosystem-based adaptation projects in vulnerable communities in the Chaco region, sustainable development platforms led by rural and Indigenous women, and the establishment of local risk management bodies with the participation of civil society organizations, strengthening community resilience to the effects of climate change.
99. The Government is in the process of developing a national forestry policy and a national forest restoration plan through participatory workshops involving public, private and community stakeholders. The National Forestry Institute has developed a forest and land use portal and a forest investment viewer that facilitate monitoring, territorial planning and the promotion of sustainable forest investments. In 2024, an environmental statistics platform was launched.
Anti-discrimination laws and measures14
100. The Constitution establishes that all persons are equal in dignity and rights, that the State must remove obstacles that perpetuate inequalities, and that protective measures to correct unjust inequalities do not constitute discrimination. It also stipulates that the absence

GE.26-02845

11

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
of a regulatory law cannot be invoked to restrict rights or guarantees. In this connection, there are sector-based laws, plans and policies that are mentioned throughout this report.
101. During the reporting period, civil servants and members of local governments, academia and civil society organizations around the country were trained in appropriate treatment and non-discrimination, strengthening inclusive State governance.
Rights of women15
102. Women's political participation has progressed steadily since 1998, with women accounting for an average of 22.6% of the legislature in 2023 and higher numbers of women occupying departmental posts and being elected to Congress. However, the State recognizes that challenges remain.
103. In this regard, attention may be drawn to the Academy of Political Training for Women Leaders, from which 740 women leaders have graduated. In addition, specialized courses were organized for women standing in elections or seeking nomination as candidates, meetings were held with political parties to disseminate the model protocol for responding to cases of political violence against women, and opportunities for coordination with civil society organizations and elected women were created.
104. The High Court of Electoral Justice promotes awareness-raising and training activities and approval has been granted to an action plan for the promotion of women's participation in public life and the full exercise of their political rights for the period 2024-2028. In this connection, the Observatory for Women's Political Participation was established to systematize and disseminate information on women's political participation in Paraguay.
105. With regard to strengthening institutional mechanisms for promoting gender equality, mention should be made of the measures taken by the Labour Affairs Service and the Office for the Response to and Prevention of Workplace Violence with a view to protecting the rights of women workers, as well as the initiatives to promote equality in military institutions and the implementation of specialized training programmes. In addition, a number of public institutions report that progress has been made in placing women in technical and decision-making positions.
106. The approval of the first Action Plan on Care for 2025-2030 marked a fundamental milestone in the implementation of the National Care Policy.
107. The Development Financing Agency promotes financial instruments for women entrepreneurs, while social assistance and humanitarian aid programmes have prioritized women as beneficiaries, especially in emergency situations. By promoting adjudication and co-ownership and conducting regularization campaigns and activities to raise awareness of rights, the National Institute for Rural and Land Development promoted the participation of women as active beneficiaries of agrarian reform. In addition, it implemented a preferential interest rate of financing of 0% for women and 4% for men for the purchase of plots of land, along with a protocol for preventing and responding to property-related violence. These measures led to an increase in women's participation: from 35% to 46% in respect of land allocation; from 34% to 48% in respect of land titling; and from 54% to 58% in access to rural housing.
108. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock promotes the equitable participation of women in agricultural development, guaranteeing their access to land, credit, training and technical assistance. In 2024, women accounted for 53% of registered producers and 45% of recipients of technical assistance.
109. Vocational training activities have been carried out, with a significant level of participation by women, including rural and Indigenous women, contributing to capacity-building and integration into the labour market in traditional and non-traditional sectors. Between 2018 and 2023, 54,196 women were trained, including 497 Indigenous women.

12

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
110. For the first time since 2024, the Centre for Military Instruction and the Training of Reserve Officers opened enrolment to women, enabling more than 1,000 women to be trained. A total of 62% of participants in the call for applications in 2026 are women.
111. Procedures for reporting, preventing and investigating sexual harassment in the workplace have been established, including the mandatory establishment of internal protocols in private companies, with more than 1,000 internal regulations having been approved. State institutions have specific protocols for addressing, preventing and dealing with cases of workplace violence.
112. Mention should be made of the "Women Leaders" mentoring programme run by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance, the purpose of which is to strengthen women's leadership in the civil service.
113. The State has stepped up its efforts to prevent and combat violence against women and girls by taking measures under Act No. 5777/2016 on the Comprehensive Protection of Women from All Forms of Violence, supplemented by Act No. 7239/2024, declaring a social emergency in respect of violence against women, children and adolescents and strengthening strategies for promoting change in the sociocultural patterns of conduct that perpetuate inequality between men and women.
114. In 2024, Paraguay launched a comprehensive strategy for family protection, the purpose of which is to prevent domestic violence and reduce the rate of femicide.
115. The Inter-institutional Working Group for the Prevention of Violence against Women, which is made up of public institutions and civil society organizations, has the primary function of advising the lead agency and recommending appropriate strategies and measures to tackle violence. In 2024, six departmental committees and four district committees were established to tackle violence against women, strengthening local coordination.
116. In 2023, the Protocol for Inter-Agency Action on Femicide and High-Risk Violence was updated. In addition, high-impact national campaigns, such as "Zero Violence", "Emergency!", "Stop Femicide!", "Let's Tell It Like It Is", "Dating without Violence", "Let's Talk in Time" and "Face Mask 37", were promoted to raise awareness, promote early prevention and transform sociocultural patterns of conduct.
117. In addition, courses are being implemented to strengthen detection, response and referral capacities. In that connection, the Ministry of Women coordinates training and technical activities at the Tape Jojarã Higher Technical Institute for Training in Gender Equality. Under Act No. 7239/2024, the Ministry of Women and the National Civil Service Institute have promoted the implementation of mandatory training courses on equal rights, non-discrimination and violence against women and children for civil servants of all ranks throughout the country. At the time of writing, there are 65,193 certified officials.
118. Attention should also be drawn to the initiative "Opening Paths: Towards a Response to Violence against Indigenous Women", the purpose of which is to organize training courses and train trainers to strengthen the response to cases of violence against Indigenous women.
119. In 2025, a protocol on the intercultural perspective in addressing and dealing with cases of violence against Indigenous women was developed along with a training manual for public officials on responding to violence against Indigenous women.
120. The Public Prosecution Service has 11 units that specialize in combating domestic violence and are authorized to respond to cases of gender-based violence in the capital and the departments of Alto Paraná and Guairá. In the rest of the country, ordinary crime units are in operation. These units also conduct their investigations on the basis of institutional instruments such as the Protocol for the Criminal Investigation of Femicide, which adopts the Latin American Model Protocol for the Investigation of Gender-related Killings of Women.
121. The Public Defence Service strengthens access to justice by employing public defenders who specialize in cases of physical, psychological and domestic violence, offences against dignity, and femicide. A protocol on specialized responses, which includes amendments relating to the rights of Indigenous women, has been approved and updated.

GE.26-02845

13

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
122. Access to justice is promoted under the National Courthouse Programme, which provides guidance, referrals and services at the community level, and through the provision of training for officials involved in the care and investigation pathway.
123. Paraguay has consolidated a comprehensive model for the support and protection of women in situations of violence. At the local level, progress is being made in establishing and consolidating regional centres and shelters. Mention should also be made of the presentation and progressive implementation of the coordinated model for the protection and comprehensive care of women at the local level, which is designed to ensure swift, effective and specialized responses to restore rights and provide comprehensive reparation. Currently, the first model in Alto Paraná is at an advanced stage of implementation.
124. The Women's Support Service provides comprehensive assistance, delivering more than 25,500 comprehensive services in 2025. The capacities of the Service have been strengthened two-fold through the recruitment of new professionals.
125. The toll-free "SOS Mujer" hotline (137) has nationwide coverage and operates around the clock. The hotline received more than 4,000 calls reporting violence in 2025 and provided more than 10,500 services. A customer service channel on WhatsApp was launched in 2026.
126. The Women's City Centre operates as a comprehensive centre with five modules (registration and initial care; the prevention of violence and responses to it; economic empowerment; comprehensive health; and early childhood). This model is expanded through the "Mobile Women's City" programme, which brings services to rural areas with the support of the Office of the First Lady: 74 districts were visited and almost 20,000 women and their families were reached. The inclusive nature of the campaign was ensured by the National Secretariat for the Human Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which supported workshops by providing more than 8,747 services.
127. The National Plan for the Prevention of Gender-based Violence and Care for Victims within the National Health System 2020-2025 sets out priorities and measures for responding to domestic violence, sexual violence and other forms of violence against women, children and adolescents, including trafficking in persons, forced labour and child labour. In addition, a handbook on comprehensive care for victims of domestic, sexual or gender-based violence sets out technical guidelines and protocols for comprehensive care.
128. Attention should be drawn to the launch of a monitoring system that uses electronic devices in the form of electronic ankle bracelets. This tool is made available by court order for prosecuted or convicted persons with the aim of reducing domestic violence and femicide and helping to reduce prison overcrowding. The State has invested approximately $3 million in contracting the service. The Ministry of the Interior has approved a manual on police conduct and coordination for a comprehensive response to domestic violence that sets out specific provisions for responding to cases involving women and girls from Indigenous communities.
129. In order to strengthen information and data systems, the Ministry of Women, in coordination with the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology, has developed a computer system for reporting violence against women. The system, which is currently being implemented, will enable inter-agency coordination, real-time monitoring of cases and a more timely response within the State protection system, contributing to the traceability of actions and preventing revictimization.
130. The National Institute of Statistics, in conjunction with other State agencies and entities, is working on standardizing records, constructing disaggregated indicators and designing a national system of statistics on gender-based violence that incorporates data from surveys and administrative records. In this connection, attention should be drawn to the Gender Atlas, which is a tool for highlighting gender gaps and guiding the formulation of evidence-based public policies.
131. In 2025, the Ministry of Women organized a workshop on gender statistics that focused on the collection, analysis and presentation of sex-disaggregated data, the development of indicators, and the strategic use of information for inclusive public policies.

14

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
132. The strengthening of the statistical system is complemented by relevant sector-based progress. The Public Defence Service has implemented a system for managing indicators relating to access to justice that makes it possible to systematically collect data on gender-based violence from all public defender's offices throughout the country. Since 2022, within the framework of the Inter-institutional Working Group for the Prevention of Violence against Women, an inter-agency process has been conducted to develop indicators and methodological guidelines on femicide, attempted femicide, domestic violence and family violence. Plans are in place to expand the process to include trafficking in persons and the sexual abuse of children and adolescents. The Public Prosecution Service has implemented an integrated electronic case management system. Through its Observatory, it publishes regular disaggregated reports on femicide, child sexual abuse, and domestic violence that inform more effective public policies.
133. The Ministry of Women has a Gender Observatory that highlights the structural inequalities affecting women in various areas of social, economic and political life. In 2025, it launched the first national competition for scientific articles with a gender focus as a mechanism to promote critical thinking, innovation in equality policies and inclusive development. Lastly, mention should be made of the launch in 2025 of the updated Gender Observatory of the Judiciary and the judiciary's first excellence award for the incorporation of the right to equality and non-discrimination in judicial decisions.
134. The budgetary resources allocated to guarantee women's rights have been progressively strengthened. In this connection, the Ministry of Women was allocated a budget of 24,124,867,588 guaranies (G)16 in 2024 and G 25,213,520,78517 in the general national budget for 2025 in order to strengthen its operational capacity. Subsequently, an additional increase of G 1.5 billion was added, which made it possible to adjust and strengthen the initial allocation, consolidating the sustainability of prevention, care and protection services for women.18
135. The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance has developed a methodological guide for measuring investment in gender that provides guidance on gender-sensitive budgeting in public programmes. In 2024, it issued an evaluation report on the impact of public spending on gender gaps.
Rights of children and adolescents19
136. The State implements comprehensive policies for protecting children and adolescents, preventing all forms of violence and strengthening the family environment. The "Seeds of the Future" programme is a priority initiative that seeks to guarantee rights from conception, with a historic level of investment until 2028. Under the programme, 100 comprehensive early childhood care centres have been constructed in 17 departments, 1,900 professionals have been hired and baby libraries have been incorporated, promoting timely stimulation, respectful child-rearing and the strengthening of families.
137. The purpose of the Comprehensive Care Programme for Child and Adolescent Victims is to prevent sexual abuse and provide comprehensive and specialized care to victims by coordinating actions with the protection system. It offers psychological, medical, legal and social assistance, as well as family support and digital follow-up of cases. Since its launch, it has provided support to 1,036 girls and adolescents, including Indigenous girls.
138. The #TodosSomosResponsables (We Are All Responsible) campaign is being implemented on an ongoing basis, promoting the prevention and reporting of violence against children and adolescents and disseminating a guide to the prevention of child sexual abuse to 3.5 million people.
139. An inter-institutional road map for a comprehensive response to the sexual abuse of children and adolescents has been distributed to more than 200,000 professionals and leaders in the prevention of sexual abuse. Between 2023 and 2025, 21,062 children and adolescents participated in prevention workshops that focused on self-protection, reporting channels and support networks. This initiative forms part of the mandatory course content established under Act No. 7239/24.

GE.26-02845

15

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
140. The National Registry of Sex Offenders against Children contains permanent records of persons who have been handed final convictions for sexual offences against children.
141. The Abrazo Programme is the main public policy for the social protection of children and adolescents at risk or in dangerous child labour situations. It is implemented in 56 districts with 74 care centres, covering 5,500 families and 14,000 children and adolescents, providing them with social support, financial assistance and guaranteed access to rights. Support is provided for Indigenous children and adolescents under the Comprehensive Programme for Indigenous Children and Adolescents. In that connection, work is carried out directly in the field to strengthen protective environments through protection centres in the communities of Punta Porã, J. Manuel Frutos, Tarumandymi and Guavirami. In 2025, support was provided to 11,647 children and adolescents.
142. The State set up an inter-agency technical committee to draft a bill aimed at eradicating unpaid domestic child labour (criadazgo) on the basis of the National Strategy for the Prevention and Eradication of Child Labour. Although the bill presented in 2024 was not passed, the National Commission for the Eradication of Child Labour, together with the Ministry for Children and Adolescents and the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security, plans to resume the legislative process in order to define this practice as an offence and establish criminal penalties. The implementation of the Adolescent Labour Register has strengthened the oversight and monitoring of protected adolescent labour.
143. A proposal for regulatory reform to eliminate exceptions to the minimum age for marriage and impose a total ban on marriage between adolescents is currently under consideration.
144. With regard to the right to identity, the Directorate General of the Civil Registry implements a single register of persons that allows for the online registration of births and facilitates registration through offices established within hospitals. Such offices currently operate in 21 locations across the country and will soon be installed in comprehensive early childhood care centres.
145. The National Programme for Alternative Care and Adoption ("Guardian Families") is a flagship public policy implemented to guarantee the fundamental right of children and adolescents to live in a family. The Programme is operationalized through the allocation of resources and the implementation of Act No. 6486/20, leading to the decentralization of technical teams, greater training for foster and adoptive families and the protection of 900 children and adolescents.
Indigenous Peoples20
146. The National Plan for Indigenous Peoples 2020-2030 is in force. A cross-cutting theme of the Plan is the implementation of a process of consultation and free, prior and informed consent with Indigenous Peoples in respect of all decision-making. Between 2022 and 2025, 637 consultation processes were carried out.
147. In addition, Act No. 7008/22 was adopted, establishing the National Commission for the Strengthening, Promotion and Appreciation of Indigenous Languages in Paraguay.
148. In 2024, a specific inter-agency cooperation agreement between the High Court of Electoral Justice and the National Institute of Indigenous Affairs was renewed with the primary objective of promoting, disseminating, registering, re-registering and updating the data in the registry in order to guarantee the effective exercise of the civil and political rights of Indigenous communities. Since 2023, a specific box for identifying members of Indigenous communities has been included in the relevant registration form. Between 2021 and 2024, fieldwork, including documentation campaigns and civic and electoral capacity-building, was carried out in different departments in the country. New polling stations were set up in Indigenous territories.

16

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
149. The National Institute of Indigenous Affairs strengthened its institutional capacity by establishing the Directorate of Territorial Management, which is a specialist body responsible for securing land rights. Between 2020 and 2025, the State acquired 3,115 ha for Indigenous communities.
150. The Ministry of Urban Planning, Housing and the Human Environment implemented programmes aimed at Indigenous communities, resulting in the construction of 15,323 homes for these communities between 2021 and 2025. At the end of this period, 1,533 homes were under construction and work on 198 homes was about to begin.
151. The Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security implements training programmes for the Indigenous population, including projects run in partnership with civil society organizations. Between 2021 and 2023, 856 Indigenous people received certificates. Of those people, 497 were women and 359 were men.
152. The National Council for Indigenous Peoples' Health, the National Directorate for Indigenous Peoples' Health and the secretariats established in several departmental governments guarantee access to health services for Indigenous peoples and the recognition, respect and strengthening of their own healthcare systems. The teams attached to the family health units make ongoing efforts to bring public health services closer to the communities located furthest from health facilities.
153. The Public Defence Service has a team of experts in Indigenous culture who assist both Indigenous Peoples in court proceedings and justice officials by providing advice at different stages of criminal proceedings involving Indigenous Peoples.
154. The Supreme Court promotes regular training for justice officials on the protocol for intercultural justice in order to mainstream Indigenous law and the human rights perspective in the adjudication of cases. The second edition of the protocol, released in 2022, was translated into Guaraní.
155. The State has made progress in complying with judgments handed down by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
156. The Yakye Axa community has been definitively settled on the 11,312 ha restored to it. The access road has been completed, and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights deemed the work to be finished in 2025. The community was also given a rainwater catchment system, as well as improved access to water from cisterns and full electrification. A total of 50 new homes were delivered in 2025.
157. The Sawhoyamaxa community now occupies the 14,404 ha expropriated in its favour. In 2024, internal roads were rehabilitated and a connecting branch road was opened. The community also has wells with a storage capacity of 100,000 litres, a regular supply of water and four schools that benefit from the "Zero Hunger" programme. Furthermore, 200 homes have been built and the electricity grid is being expanded.
158. The Xákmok Kásek community lives on 7,701 ha and has two access roads. The National Institute of Indigenous Affairs requested the expropriation of an additional 2,999 ha for the community. A total of 13 wells, a reservoir with a mill, a newly completed family health unit, and 80 homes were installed. In addition, the electrical grid was expanded, and additional improvements are planned in order to stabilize the service.
People of African descent21
159. In 2022, Act No. 6940 was enacted, establishing mechanisms and procedures to prevent and punish acts of racism and discrimination against people of African descent. The Act also provides for the development of a national plan and the establishment of a national registry of people of African descent, among other measures.
160. In this connection, the National Council of People of African Descent was established to act as an advisory body and to promote the implementation of the Act, with the participation of several State agencies and entities and three representatives of organizations of people of African descent in the country. The national plan is currently being developed.

GE.26-02845

17

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1

Persons with disabilities22
161. The National Action Plan for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2015-2030 is currently being implemented. Furthermore, the National Commission on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was strengthened. The Commission is a joint body in which the State and civil society organizations evaluate public policies on a quarterly basis. Ten thematic technical committees operate to ensure that public policies are in compliance with international human rights standards and meet the real needs of persons with disabilities.
162. Regional offices have been opened and strengthened to bring rehabilitation services, assistive devices and disability certification services closer to the interior of the country, reducing access gaps resulting from geographical factors. Furthermore, the establishment of disability secretariats in municipal and departmental government offices has been promoted.
163. In 2023, the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare approved technical guidelines on the appropriate and respectful treatment of persons with disabilities by health workers, which were developed through a participatory process. The Ministry also has a guide to sexual and reproductive healthcare for adolescents with disabilities.
164. Specific protocols have been developed to ensure access to justice for persons with psychosocial disabilities and care for persons with disabilities who are deprived of their liberty.
165. Disability is mainstreamed in the national risk management policy in accordance with article 11 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Georeferenced records have been established to identify persons with disabilities in flood-prone areas, ensuring that evacuation plans are accessible and prioritizing the bodily integrity and autonomy of persons with disabilities.
166. The disability certification process has been modernized, migrating to a digital system that makes it easier to obtain the relevant document, which is essential for gaining access to all social programmes.
167. Laws have been adopted on exemption from customs duties and VAT on the importation of vehicles and adaptation mechanisms; exemption from charges for the renewal of identity cards and police records; the amendment of the Electoral Code to guarantee the exercise of the right to vote for persons with disabilities; the use of canes for persons who are blind, blind-deaf or visually impaired; the establishment of inclusive and accessible tourism; and the guarantee of the full exercise of legal rights for persons with disabilities.
168. The First Atlas on Disability, which incorporates information from six public institutions to highlight gaps in health, education, employment and access to services, has been developed. Plans are in place to move towards a second stage that will focus on harmonizing administrative records and ensuring the quality and sustainability of statistical information.

Notes

Challenges
169. Paraguay reaffirms that it remains committed to making its best efforts to follow up on and give effect to all the recommendations, thereby confirming the importance it attaches to the international human rights protection system and, in particular, its open and transparent collaboration with the universal periodic review.
1 Recomendaciones 118.1, 118.2, 118.6, 118.7, 118.8, 118.9, 118.10, 118.11. 2 Recomendaciones 118.13, 118.14, 118.15. 3 Recomendación 118.12. 4 Recomendaciones 118.16, 118.17, 118.18, 118.19, 118.20, 118.21, 118.22, 118.23, 118.24, 118.25,
118.26, 118.27, 118.28, 118.29, 118.76. 5 Recomendaciones 118.113, 118.114, 118.115, 118.116, 118.118, 118.119, 118.167.

18

GE.26-02845

A/HRC/WG.6/52/PRY/1
6 Recomendaciones 118.85, 118.109, 118.110, 118.111, 118.112. 7 Recomendaciones 118.121, 118.122, 118.123, 118.124, 118.125, 118.126, 118.127, 118.128,
118.129, 118.130, 118.131, 118.132, 118.137, 118.138, 118.139, 118.140, 118.141. 8 Recomendaciones 118.144, 118.145, 118.146, 118.147, 118.148, 118.149, 118.150, 118.151,
118.152, 118.153, 118.154. 9 Recomendaciones 118.72, 118.73, 118.74, 118.75, 118.77, 118.78, 118.79. 10 Recomendaciones 118.53, 118.55, 118.56, 118.57, 118.58, 118.59, 118.60, 118.61, 118.62, 118.63,
118.64, 118.65, 118.66, 118.67, 118.68, 118.70. 11 Recomendaciones 118.99, 118.100, 118.101, 118.102, 118.103, 118.104, 118.105, 118.106, 118.107,
118.170, 118.187. 12 Recomendaciones 118.80, 118.81, 118.82, 118.83, 118.84, 118.86, 118.87, 118.88, 118.89, 118.90,
118.91, 118.92, 118.93, 118.94, 118.95, 118.96, 118.97, 118.98. 13 Recomendaciones 118.48, 118.49, 118.50, 118.51, 118.52. 14 Recomendaciones 118.30, 118.31, 118.32, 118.33, 118.34, 118.35, 118.36, 118.37, 118.38, 118.39,
118.40, 118.41, 118.42, 118.43, 118.44, 118.45, 118.46, 118.47, 118.166. 15 Recomendaciones 118.155, 118.156, 118.157, 118.158, 118.159, 118.160, 118.161, 118.162,
118.163, 118.164, 118.165, 118.169, 118.168, 118.171, 118.172, 118.173, 118.174, 118.175, 118.176, 118.177, 118.178, 118.179, 118.180, 118.181, 118.182, 118.183, 118.184, 118.185, 118.186. 16 Equivalente a aproximadamente USD 3.647.165,54. 17 Equivalente a aproximadamente USD 3.811.774,33. 18 Aproximadamente USD 115.000, aprobado mediante reconsideraciones parlamentarias. 19 Recomendaciones 118.187, 118.188, 118.189, 118.190, 118.191, 118.192, 118.193, 118.194, 118.195. 20 Recomendaciones 118.52, 118.196, 118.197, 118.198, 118.199, 118.200, 118.201, 118.202, 118.203, 118.204, 118.205, 118.206, 118.207. 21 Recomendación 118.37. 22 Recomendaciones 118.35; 118.66; 118.131; 118.146; 118.147; 118.148; 118.208; 118.209; 118.210.

GE.26-02845

19

